
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B19-59</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B012-222</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/WAR/harvey02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122090150 text/html 7272
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:01:43 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:40:44 GMT
Content-length: 7057
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD><TITLE>Roderick T. Harvey (April 2, 1996)</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF" TEXT="#000000" LINK="#0000FF" VLINK="#FF00FF" ALINK="#FF0000">
<PRE>
Roderick T. Harvey
Saline County Jail
Harrisburg, IL 62946

March 22, 1996

Dear Carl,

     It's been awhile since I wrote to you; in fact, it was in 
January.  At that time you made some copies of several of my 
writings (which didn't come out too good on your scanner and 
laser printer, but I thank you very much nonetheless), and you 
also contacted my P.D. attorney, recommending Ed Rosenthal for an 
expert witness.  I was so impressed with your concern and efforts 
on my behalf, and very enthusiastic about the prospect of Mr. 
Rosenthal being a part of my defense.  Unfortunately, the P.D. 
was not so eager to have an outspoken proponent of marijuana on 
the witness stand, and quite possibly he was right.  I say that 
now, after observing to tactics of the prosecutor - Christopher 
More.
     Before I tell you about the latter, let me bring you up to 
date on other happenings.  A week after your very much 
appreciated undertaking to provide me with an expert witness, on 
February 6, the day before my jury selection and trial was to 
begin, I was very unexpectedly released from jail.  After I 
hurriedly got myself well away from the vicinity, I called the 
appointed lawyer to see what the heck was going on; after six 
months and six days being held prisoner with no bond, to be 
inexplicably set completely free with no stipulation whatsoever.  
(?)  Wow!?
     I was informed that it was just a mistake on the indictment, 
having to do with the dates of my alleged manufacturing of 
marijuana, a technicality that would be (probably/maybe) revamped 
and I could (would) then be re-indicted.  I was.  I turned myself 
in the 13th of February (a very foolish, stupid thing to do under 
the circumstances, in view of the fact that I'm a conscientious 
objector being warred against by an unscrupulous enemy who does 
take prisoners and holds them indefinitely), and even though I 
demonstrated good faith, they vehemently refused to give me any 
bond whatsoever (again).  What kind of a country (government) is 
this?  What about Article VIII of the Bill of Rights?  I didn't 
do anything to anybody, I'm just accused of "growing" a harmless, 
natural, God-given plant, way back in the woods.
     Well, no longer just accused, - Wednesday (two days ago), 
March 20, 1996, I was found guilty by a jury (not of my peers), 
and scheduled to be sentenced June 20, 1996.  It took the jury 
five hours to decide.  It was very evident that if I had a 
competent lawyer I would have been acquitted.  I've already 
started preparing my own appeal, on various grounds, including 
inadequate representation.  By the way, the expert witness turned 
out to be a professor from So. Ill. U., but the prosecutor got 
him barred, after he had stated his education, employment and 
qualifications, because of Rule 16, the P.D. had neglected to 
inform the prosecution of this expert witness.  Incompetence?  
(now I go to prison)
     The P.D. told me the trial transcripts would cost me about 
$500, so I'll be unable to acquire them until after I'm 
sentenced, at which time, apparently, he can get me a copy.  Oh!, 
how I wish I had them now, to study, and to show some attorneys 
for legal advice.  the public pretender did such an obviously 
poor job of defending me.  OK, enough said.

later -
     Oh, one other thing you've probably heard before, the 
prosecutor made a big deal out of the fact that they found in 
some of my notes the acronym N.O.R.M.L., and the phone number 
with the last four digits W.E.E.D. (John Hartman).  All they had 
was circumstantial evidence against me, and so they were grasping 
at straws to connect me with marijuana and make me look guilty.

March 31, -
     Thank you again, Carl, for everything you've done for me.

April 2, -
     It's been two weeks now since I've been convicted, and I 
think I've finally got my head screwed back on about halfway 
right, I hope! (phew).  Sorry about not getting this letter 
finished and sent off to you, but I'm sure you understand.
     Altho' these preceding pages may seem to indicate the 
contrary, I'm really coming along fine Carl.  My emotional well-
being and mental outlook has improved immensely since that first 
letter you intercepted last year.  I can't thank you enough.  
Admittedly, I've been in a slump, or a touch of writer's block 
here for a bit, but I'm out of it now and got the ol' pen 
scribblin' like mad.  I have to, I've got a pile of at least ten 
letters here I have to get answered.
     Yes, I've very involved in the Reform Movement and the 
literature has been pouring in.  I'm getting quite a reputation 
here at the jail, I'm proud to say; albeit, I'm more that a 
little suspicious that my mail is being tampered with (more than 
what is legally permissible).  Can you suggest what recourse, or 
action I should take?  If any.
     I received a fantastic letter from Paul Westmoreland last 
week, which really helped me to feel like a part of the solution, 
the movement.  I want to follow in his shoes (as it were), with 
him going as I'm coming.  How I wish I could accomplish as much 
as he has.  With his guidance and support, and others', I will.
     I never would have thought it before, but now I really 
believe that I can help make a difference.  Even from behind 
bars, I'm going to make a difference.  I am astounded at how many 
great people and organizations there are working to restore our 
constitutional rights and freedom; i.e., the Drug Policy 
Foundation, F.A.M.M., M.P.P., Grassroots Party of Minnesota, 
Green Panthers!, VOCALs, TEACH, to name a few.  I'm excited to be 
part of it.  Unfortunately, I had to have my life virtually 
devastated before I woke up, stood up and got active.  I've been 
running away from the big war machine since the early '70s.  
Well, I'm making my stand right here, right now; I'm ready to 
fight.  But I'll fight fair and honest.
     Nobody could believe I turned myself in to the feds.  Not my 
friends, fellow prisoners, marshals, correction officers, the 
prosecution or task force agents; but I'm tired of running from 
the oppressors.  I think I can do more, in a constructive, 
positive way, from within prison than I would out there on the 
run as a fugitive.  We'll see.  (Paul's got me reading damn law 
books every day.)  Wry smile.
     Thanks again Mr. Olsen.  I'll be in touch.
     I see a little light,
     Roderick

P.S. If there's anything I can do for you, NORML, POWs & friends, 
please don't hesitate to ask; I'm anxious to do whatever I can.
     "We can't do everything that we want to do, but sometimes we 
get so involved in letting what we can't do get in the way of 
what we can, that we don't do anything."  - Dr. Joycelyn Elders

</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>