
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B14-176</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA075-000492-B033-373</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.privacy.org:80/pi/countries/canada/execsum.html 199.34.33.146 19970209035552 text/html 27371
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sun, 09 Feb 1997 03:55:59 GMT
Server: Apache/0.8.14
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 27198
Last-modified: Mon, 15 Apr 1996 05:01:58 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML><HEAD>
<TITLE>EXECUTIVE SUMMARY</TITLE>
<LINK REV="made" HREF="mailto:soucy.kathleen@ic.gc.ca">
<!-- Author:  Akay Information Consulting Inc. -->
<!-- Date:  March 1995 -->
<!-- Project Authority:  Kathleen Soucy -->
<!-- Contact email:  soucy.kathleen@ic.gc.ca -->
<!-- Contact phone:  (613)990-4255 --></HEAD>
<BODY>
<H1>EXECUTIVE SUMMARY</H1>
<HR>
<H3><A HREF="report.html#A1">INTRODUCTION</A></H3>

       The seventy-six responses received cover a wide spectrum of interests and expertise. 
       In order to simplify comparisons between them, the responses have been broken
       down into eight categories.  These categories and the relevant number of responses
       in each are as follows: Medical and Social Research (21); Telecommunications and
       Technology (12); Individuals (11); Consumer and Privacy Advocates (11); Financial
       Services, Credit and Marketing Groups (5); Privacy Commissioners (4); Government
       (4); Miscellaneous (8).<P>

       Each of the submissions is summarized in regard to general comments on privacy,
       privacy concerns and various methods of ensuring privacy.  Specific proposals and
       recommendations, stemming from the four main potential approaches set out in the
       Discussion Paper, are included in each summary, where applicable.  These various
       elements are brought together and summarized in the review itself, which includes
       conclusions resulting therefrom.

<H3><A HREF="report.html#A5">WHAT IS PRIVACY?</A></H3>

       The definition of privacy set out in the Discussion Paper is generally accepted by the
       great majority of respondents.<P>

       One of the questions that frequently comes up is "Who owns personal information?". 
       The majority of consumer and privacy advocates and privacy commissioners believe
       that personal information is owned by the individual.  However, most private sector
       organizations tend to see it as a commodity over which the consumer has varying
       degrees of control.<P>

       A number of respondents contend that the right to privacy should be incorporated in
       the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  However, recognizing the difficulty of amending
       the Charter, they are of the opinion that any amendment to the Privacy Act or any new
       federal privacy legislation should include a preamble that recognizes the principle of
       privacy.

<H3><A HREF="report.html#A9">WHAT ARE THE PRIVACY CONCERNS?</A></H3>

       The great majority of respondents, including those from the private sector,
       acknowledge that there is strong and growing public concern about privacy protection
       on the information highway.  This view is corroborated by a number of privacy surveys
       that have been conducted over the past few years.  The most quoted of these
       surveys are the Ekos survey of 1992, the Equifax survey of 1992 and the poll done by
       Gallup Canada in 1994.<P>

       There is considerable concern about freedom from intrusion.  Monitoring and
       surveillance are seen to be the most potentially damaging forms of intrusion.  Typical
       examples include, tracking the whereabouts of an individual by wireless or satellite-based
       personal communications systems, tracing the market profile of an individual
       from the "data shadow" cast by a series of transactions, and employee surveillance. 
       Surveillance of E-mail, including the related question of who owns the E-mail
       message, also is seen as a problem.  Monitoring of cellular phone messages by the
       use of scanners, as well as electronic surveillance in the home, also rate highly. 
       Nevertheless surveillance and monitoring are seen to have some benefits, particularly
       in the fields of search and rescue, home security and fleet management. It all
       depends on the uses to which they are put.  Lesser forms of intrusion are seen as
       being more of an annoyance, such as telemarketing which the individual can
       terminate at will. <P>

       The protection of personal information is the major concern of the public  This is
       expressed by the lack of control that an individual has over his/her personal
       information.  The use of personal information to create personal profiles of individuals,
       as well as a perceived lack of security and protection for personal information
       holdings, also are significant issues.  The unauthorized use of the Social Insurance
       Number (SIN), protection of medical and health information, and cross-border
       transfers of information are also of great concern to some respondents.  Equally,
       business is concerned that the social and economic benefits of the collection and use
       of personal information must be recognized.  Some journalists and writers fear that
       the freedom of expression provisions of the Charter could be subverted by
       unwarranted privacy rules.  Mention is also made of the strange ambivalence that
       occurs within the general public.  Very often members of the public believe that it is
       their right to know all the sordid details of the personal lives of celebrities but would
       be horrified if the same information was divulged about themselves.<P>

       The continuing and rapid evolution of technology raises a concern that privacy could
       become the victim of creeping erosion.  Security of stored data is also a significant
       concern.  Nonetheless, there is a growing acceptance of the use of technology,
       coupled with the benefits it can bring.  On the other hand, business is concerned that
       privacy requirements not be allowed to inhibit the introduction of new technologies.  A
       fair balance is required between the demands of technology development and privacy
       protection.<P>

       Some of the foregoing concerns can be attributed to a feeling of lack of knowledge
       and power on the part of individuals.  In particular, they often do not know just who
       holds information about themselves and they feel vulnerable in the light of well-publicized 
       privacy infractions.<P>

       Medical and social research, as it relates to the protection of personal information, is
       a significant issue.  By far the greatest number of responses come from medical and
       social researchers.  They are concerned that strict privacy rules could prohibit the
       long term storage of personal medical and health data and could mandate prior
       consent for the use of such data, in spite of the very high levels of security provided. 
       If this occurs, much valuable medical and social research, which is directed toward
       the public good, could be stifled.  Examples include, tracking the incidence of fatal
       diseases such as cancer and heart disease and undertaking studies as the basis for
       important government decisions in the social policy field.<P>

       In overall terms, there is a strong belief, expressed by many respondents from all
       sectors, that if the various concerns of the general public are not alleviated, the
       information highway will not be used to its full potential.

<H3><A HREF="report.html#A16">HOW TO ENSURE PRIVACY</A></H3>

       As a background to potential changes in privacy protection, some respondents
       provided details of the historical evolution of the development of privacy practices and
       legislation both in Canada and abroad.  It is noted that in Canada, only the federal
       government and five provinces have legislation to protect personal information held
       by governments.  Only Quebec has legislation governing the protection of personal
       information in the private sector.  At the federal level, some sector specific legislation,
       governing such areas as telecommunications and financial institutions, makes
       provisions for the implementation of regulations in regard to the management of
       personal information.  To date, however, regulations have only been implemented in
       the telecommunications sector.  The development of voluntary privacy codes in the
       private sector also is traced.  In the overall scheme of things, these scattered
       developments are seen as an unsatisfactory patchwork approach.  They are
       confusing and difficult to understand by the average individual and will not address
       emerging international standards, the dangers of rapidly evolving technologies, or the
       expectations of the public.<P>

       International developments are also reviewed.  Europe is seen to lead the world,
       particularly over the last 10 to 15 years.  Commencing in 1982, the Organization for
       Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) published a set of privacy
       guidelines.  The guidelines contained comprehensive personal data protection
       principles, coupled with provisions for the restriction of transborder flows of personal
       data to countries which did not have equivalent protection standards.  Relatively all
       privacy legislation in Canada is based on the principles found in the OECD guidelines. 
       At the present time, the guidelines are being updated into  directives by the European
       Communities (EC) and compliance will be mandatory for all members, once they have
       been passed by the European Parliament.  The most important factor about the
       proposed directives, from Canada's viewpoint, is that they have the potential to inhibit
       trade by preventing the flow of personal information, whether in automated or manual
       form, to countries that do not have adequate data standards.  At the present time, it is
       doubtful that Canada would qualify because it does not have national standards
       governing the private sector.  Privacy developments in the USA also are summarized. 
       The USA does not have national standards applicable to the whole of the private
       sector, nor does it have legislation covering the public sector which meets all of the
       provisions of the federal Privacy Act.<P>

       The Discussion Paper's call for input on principles that should form the basis of
       effective privacy protection met with a wide range of responses.  Most of this input
       was based on the OECD guidelines.  Basic to the arguments of some consumer and
       privacy advocates and privacy commissioners is the premise that the right to privacy
       is a basic human right.  Stemming from this, is the view that the right to control one's
       personal information is the most important factor, coupled with the principle of
       consent.  However, some variations of viewpoint exist in regard to the question of
       consent.  Many consumer and privacy advocates and privacy commissioners see
       consent as meaning "informed consent".  However, in the private sector consent
       tends to be seen as "consent", no matter how obtained.  Moreover, consumer and
       privacy advocates and privacy commissioners tended to see consent as "opting-in",
       whereas the private sector sees it as "opting-out". One of the additional principles
       raised, beyond those contained in the OECD guidelines, is the principle that
       individuals should not have to pay to maintain basic and existing levels of privacy. 
       Again, there are differences of viewpoint on this issue.  Some respondents believe
       that levels of privacy above the basic level should be paid for, while others maintain
       that privacy should not be prejudiced by inability to pay. Another principle entails
       freedom of individuals to choose whether or not to connect to the information
       infrastructure, to accept or reject services that may affect their level of privacy, and to
       be free to sub scribe to, and be charged for, only those services they wish to receive. 
       However, they should not suffer reduced levels of service because of their choice.
       Nevertheless, in overall terms, there is little difference in views.  Most respondents
       support the principles contained in the Canadian Standards Association's (CSA) draft
       "Model Code for the Protection of Personal Information".  Other submissions propose
       principles that should govern the information highway itself.<P>

       An emerging problem is seen in the blurring of distinction between information which
       is resident in the public sector and that which is resident in the private sector.  In
       Europe, this distinction between the public and private sectors, in terms of privacy
       protection, has been rendered irrelevant by the proposed EC directives.  Within the
       private sector, a further blurring is evident.  With the increasing integration of various
       media on the information highway, the original distinction between the various
       players, e.g., telephone and cable companies, the press, broadcasters, and
       marketers, it is becoming increasingly difficult to establish clear boundaries between
       sectors.  Accordingly, the effective establishment of sectoral voluntary codes could
       become more problematic.<P>

       The patchwork system of federal/provincial legislation and private sector voluntary
       codes across Canada is stimulating the call for a "level playing field".  Different
       legislation in different jurisdictions results in "rich and poor" in terms of privacy
       protection.  Some provinces have no legislation at all, while Quebec has legislation
       covering both the public and private sectors.  This could lead to the establishment of
       "data havens" where companies can locate to avoid privacy protection requirements,
       thus leading to unfair competition.  Therefore, all players are interested in the
       establishment of a national privacy standard.  However, how this is to be done results
       in different opinions.<P>

       The main focus of the Discussion Paper centered around approaches to be used in
       promoting privacy protection in the private sector.  Four potential approaches were
       identified, legislation and regulation, voluntary codes and standards, technological
       solutions, and education.  While there is very little difference in views on the roles to
       played by the two latter approaches, there is considerable debate on the relative
       merits of legislation and voluntary codes.<P>

       The majority of respondents believe that the government needs to take stronger
       action and establish new legislation.  With only two private sector respondents being
       in favour of legislation, the majority of support for this approach comes from
       consumer and privacy advocates, privacy commissioners and individuals.  The
       benefits of legislation and regulation are seen as guaranteeing to all Canadians an
       equal level of privacy protection and providing a legal means of redress, sanctions,
       complaint and appeal.  In addition, such a regime would meet the standards of the
       EC, thus avoiding potential trade problems.  Many suggestions are made as to how
       this may be accomplished.  The preferred method is for legislation to establish a
       framework for a set of national privacy standards under which private sector codes
       would operate and be bound.  This could be complemented by an independent and
       impartial administrative body which would enforce compliance, hear complaints,
       provide redress and deliver sanctions.  Suggestions are made that such a system
       could be based on the Quebec Act.  Moreover, lack of bureaucracy, low costs and
       cost effectiveness are seen as prerequisites.   A phase-in period is recommended,
       together with early consultations with the provinces to harmonize both public and
       private sector legislation across the country.  Other suggestions include amending
       and updating the federal Privacy Act to bring it into line with the proposed legislation
       and for the public sector to "clean up its own shop".  In effect, it is contended that the
       federal government must assume a strong leadership role.  Meanwhile, opponents of
       the legislative route point its problems.  It is seen as inflexible, incapable of rapid
       change to accommodate the rapidly evolving technology and marketplace, and
       possibly inhibiting new initiatives and investment.  The time taken to reach a
       federal/provincial consensus is seen as a problem, as is the fact that it would go
       against the current trend of deregulation in the global marketplace.  Moreover, it
       would cost more in a period of fiscal restraint.  The private sector is generally against
       legislation.  The telecommunications industry, in particular, is against additional
       legislation for the protection of personal information because it believes that privacy
       directives issued by the Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications
       Commission (CRTC) are sufficient to meet privacy concerns.  On the other hand, it is
       strongly in favour of technology-specific legislation that would make it an offence to
       intercept radio-based telecommunications and which would generally prohibit the
       manufacture, importation, sale and distribution of scanners capable of monitoring
       radio-based telephones, including cellular phones.  Nevertheless, the private sector is
       not universally against general privacy legislation, provided that it is implemented only
       after voluntary codes have been given a chance to prove themselves and have been
       shown not to work.  Additional provincial legislation, in the absence of federal
       legislation, is not seen as viable because it would not lead to uniform standards
       across Canada.<P>

       Voluntary codes and standards are mostly favoured by the private sector because of
       their flexibility and adaptability in meeting the particular needs of different
       technologies and segments of the marketplace.  They are also seen as less costly to
       operate, can raise the profile of privacy within an organization, and can help to
       educate consumers.  Moreover, they can be national in scope and provide a level
       playing field within each sector.  In addition, they are capable of being made
       mandatory across all members of a sectoral organization or can be strengthened by
       peer pressure, compelling competitive interests and consumer demand.  The main
       objection to voluntary codes and standards is that they are just that, "voluntary". 
       Many are not seen as fully responsive to consumer concerns, in that they do not meet
       the full range of fair information practices and do not have adequate mechanisms for
       complaint and redress.  Also, they are sometimes tailored more to business interests
       than to consumers' privacy rights. Moreover, they may not meet the "adequate"
       standards of privacy protection required by the proposed EC directives.  This being
       said, consumer and privacy advocates and privacy commissioners are not completely
       against voluntary codes.  They are considered to have an important role to play,
       because of their flexibility and adaptability,  provided they are governed by
       overarching legislation.  In this regard, both the private sector and the consumer and
       privacy advocacy and privacy commissioner groups strongly support the recent
       initiatives of the CSA to develop a voluntary privacy code as a national standard.  The
       CSA  draft code is being developed by a working committee comprised of
       representatives of governments, privacy commissioners, consumer and privacy
       advocates and the private sector.  The code, when implemented, could provide a
       standard against which private sector voluntary codes could be measured and may
       meet the adequacy provisions of the EC privacy directives.<P>

       Technological solutions are also seen as having a part to play.  Technology can
       threaten privacy but new developments can now allow privacy protection features to
       be built in at the outset.  In this regard, a number of respondents see the need for
       privacy impact assessments to be made an essential part of the systems
       development process.  Whether the information highway should be designed to
       provide high levels of privacy protection and whether it will slow the pace and raise
       the cost of innovation is also addressed by many respondents.  Built in security
       measures are seen as a key in this regard.  New innovations in this area include
       advanced encryption, the use of smart cards and the implementation of digital
       technology.  Basic protective measures are seen as essential, coupled with additional
       measures which could be provided at extra cost.  Furthermore, it is suggested that
       the government encourage the development of new protective technologies and
       provide support for research and development in order to provide new opportunities
       for Canadian industry.  In general, privacy protection measures are not seen as
       increasing the cost of innovation,  provided they are not too excessive.  There is a
       wide variety views on how Canadians can become better involved in the design of
       potentially privacy-threatening technologies.  Avenues already exist, such as
       involvement in CRTC hearings and participation in the development of new CSA
       technical standards.  However, many in all sectors see the need for more direct
       involvement at the design stage, provided that it is limited to informal consultations
       and the provision of advice by such groups as consumer advocates and privacy
       commissioners.<P>

       Lack of awareness and confusion on the part of the public are seen as significant
       problems.  Therefore, there is wide agreement that consumer education is essential. 
       Education of employees and businesses on their privacy responsibilities also is seen
       as necessary.  There is a general consensus that both governments and business
       have a major responsibility in this area.  Most businesses indicate commitment and
       many are already engaged in education programs.  As well, consumer and privacy
       advocates and privacy commissioners indicate willingness to become involved,
       provided that funding and resources are made available.  However, it is also
       recognized that consumers themselves have responsibilities and must also take
       initiatives in this area.  The educational  tools available are seen to be many and
       varied.  These range across the publicizing of private sector privacy codes and the
       CSA code, periodic public awareness campaigns, production of material and
       brochures aimed at different elements of the public for distribution in information
       centres and libraries, etc.

<H3><A HREF="report.html#A26">CONCLUSIONS</A></H3>

       There is a wide range of real public concerns on privacy matters which, if not
       addressed quickly, could escalate to the point that the effective functioning of the
       information highway could be jeopardized.<P>

       There is a significant divergence of views between the majority of members of the
       private sector and consumer and privacy advocacy and privacy commissioner groups
       on the relative merits of legislation and voluntary codes.  However, there also is a
       pragmatic and conciliatory approach to these differences which makes a compromise
       achievable.<P>

       No single approach to the resolution of the problems is viable.  Therefore, a
       combination of the approaches outlined in the Discussion Paper is most likely to
       succeed because they are inter-related and mutually supportive.<P>

       In order to achieve comprehensive solutions to the various problems identified by
       respondents, within the minimum possible time frame, a well-coordinated plan should
       be developed.<P>

       The following are potential elements of a plan which the Advisory Council may wish to
       consider.<P>

<UL>
<LI>The establishment by legislation of a national framework of privacy standards,
          probably based on the CSA model privacy code, under which private sector codes
          would operate and be bound.<P>
<LI>Revisions to the federal Privacy Act to overcome its current shortcomings,
          including a revised preamble, provision for the protection and security of personal
          information, and provision for the establishment of privacy impact assessments
          within the public sector.<P>
<LI>Development of a program to reinforce, strengthen and update the application of
          privacy protection practices within the public sector.<P>
<LI> Early discussion with the provinces to implement national standards on a country-wide basis.<P>
<LI>Development of legislation to make it an offence to intercept private radio-based
          telecommunications, and to generally prohibit the manufacture, importation, sale
          and distribution of scanners capable of monitoring radio-based telephones,
          including cellular phones.<P>
<LI> Development of a program to systematically promote the development of private
          sector codes based on the CSA model privacy code.<P>
<LI> Creation of a joint government/industry program to promote and support the
          development of privacy protection technologies.<P>
<LI> Promotion of consultations between industry/government, consumer groups and
          privacy commissioners on the development of significant and new potentially
          privacy-threatening technologies and systems.<P>
<LI>Development of a joint industry/government privacy education program in
          consultation with consumer groups and privacy commissioners.<P>
<LI>Establishment of consultations between government and the medical and social
          research groups to resolve the apparent dichotomy between the protection of
          personal information and the need to carry out medical and social research
          necessary to promote the public good.<P>
<LI>Development by the government of a standard privacy protection clause for all
          contracts or agreements involving the transfer or exchange of personal
          information with all institutions outside of government.<P>
<LI> Issuance of a public announcement after adoption of the plan and ministerial approval.<P>
</UL>

       Failure to address the major problems identified by respondents could be followed by
       increasing public privacy concerns, coupled with avoidance of use of the information
       highway.  Also, it might lead to Canada's privacy protection standards being
       considered inadequate under the EC privacy directives.
</BODY></HTML>

</DOC>