
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B18-270</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B024-295</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/spyker.html 206.61.184.43 19970122060458 text/html 8584
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:04:45 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:05:45 GMT
Content-length: 8369
</DOCHDR>
<!doctype html public "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<HTML>

<HEAD>

<META NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<META NAME="AUTHOR" CONTENT="Carl E. Olsen">
</HEAD>

<BODY>

<PRE>
                       UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
                       FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

LADD HUFFMAN,
Plaintiff,
v.                                                Civil No. 93-0237 NHJ
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION,
Defendant. 

                DECLARATION OF DANIEL A. SPYKER, Ph.D., M.D. 

I, Dr. Daniel A. Spyker, do hereby declare the following:

     1.   I am a Medical Officer in the Pilot Drug Evaluation Staff, 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, United States Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA).  I have held this position since August 1990. 

     2.   In my position as Medical Officer, I am engaged fulltime in 
the evaluation of clinical drug trials, proposed and completed, in 
support of investigational new drug applications (INDs) and new drug 
applications submitted to the FDA under the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (the Act).  Since October 1990, I have been responsible for 
the review and follow-up of INDs relating to marijuana, including a 
number of single-patient INDs from physicians requesting therapeutic 
marijuana for their patients. 

     3.   A single-patient IND for marijuana, an unapproved new drug 
under the Act, allows a physician to receive and dispense the drug as an 
investigational drug for use in one specific patient.  Because marijuana 
is not a drug approved by the FDA, distribution of marijuana outside the 
IND process is in violation of the Act.

     4.   While FDA processes and allows single-patient INDs for 
investigational drugs to proceed, FDA does not supply the drugs.  In the 
case of single-patient INDs for marijuana, the marijuana is provided by 
the National Institute on Drug Abuse, Public Health Service, Department 
of Health and Human Services, pursuant to its authority under the Public 
Health Service Act.  Before the National Institute on Drug Abuse can 
supply marijuana to the sponsoring physician for a single-patient IND, 
because the drug is regulated under the Controlled Substances Act, the 
physician must apply to and receive approval from the Drug Enforcement 
Administration, the Department of Justice, to receive and dispense the 
marijuana.  When the Drug Enforcement Administration issues a 
registration for the physician to receive the marijuana, it provides the 
order form which must be presented to the National Institute on Drug 
Abuse for shipment of the marijuana. 

     5.   When a single-patient IND for marijuana is received by the 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, it is forwarded to the Pilot 
Drug Evaluation Staff for review.  The IND is assigned to a consumer 
safety officer who distributes copies to the reviewing chemist, 
pharmacologist, and medical officer.  These reviewers decide whether it 
is safe for the study proposed in the IND to proceed.

     6.   The Center for Drug Evaluation and Research received a single-
patient IND for marijuana for Ladd Huffman on January 2, 1991.  The IND 
was submitted by Patricia J. Harrison, M.D.  The IND was received by the 
Pilot Drug Evaluation Staff on January 7, 1991.  The consumer safety 
officer distributed the IND to the reviewers.  The pharmacology review 
was completed on January 10, 1991, and it determined that it was safe 
for the IND to proceed.  The chemistry review was completed on January 
11, 1991, and it determined that it was safe for the IND to proceed.

     7.   I called the sponsoring physician, Dr. Harrison, on January 11, 
1991, to discuss the requirements for the IND and to request the 
submission of additional information. 

     8.   I completed the medical review of the IND for Ladd Huffman on 
January 16, 1991, and determined that it was safe for the IND to proceed. 
On January 25, 1991, I received the information I had requested from Dr. 
Harrison.

     9.   On March 8, 1991, I issued a letter to Dr. Harrison advising 
her that the IND for Ladd Huffman could proceed. 

     10.  In June 1991, the Pilot Drug Evaluation Staff was advised that 
the Assistant Secretary for Health, Department of Health and Human 
Services, had decided to consider whether the National Institute on Drug 
Abuse would continue to supply marijuana for single-patient INDs. 

     11.  In March 1992, the Pilot Drug Evaluation Staff was advised that 
the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services had made a 
decision that the National Institute on Drug Abuse would not provide 
marijuana for single-patient INDs except to those patients who were 
receiving marijuana at the time.  This group receiving marijuana 
included patients whose INDs FDA has already reviewed and allowed to 
proceed, whose physicians had received approval to receive the marijuana 
from the Drug Enforcement Administration and for whom the National 
Institute on Drug Abuse had shipped marijuana upon receipt of the Drug 
Enforcement Administration order form submitted by the physicians.

     12.  As I understand it, the March 1992 decision of the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services not to provide marijuana to additional single 
patient INDs was based on a number of considerations including the health 
concerns of providing patients with potentially harmful substances, and 
the fact that existing medical evidence does not support additional 
research on smoked marijuana to treat disease in single patient studies.  
For those patients who had already received marijuana, marijuana would 
continue to be supplied while their physicians, with assistance from the 
Department of Health and Human Services, explored alternative therapies.  
Through attrition among this patient group, the Department of Health and 
Human Services would eventually achieve its ultimate goal of not 
supplying marijuana for any patients under single-patient INDs. 

     13.  As I understand from the National Institute on Drug Abuse, 
shipments began in August 1991 for the last person to receive marijuana 
under a single-patient IND.

     14.  As I understand from the Drug Enforcement Administration, that 
agency received an application from Dr. Harrison to receive and dispense 
marijuana for Ladd Huffman on August 19, 1991, but no registration to 
receive marijuana was issued.  Since Dr. Harrison had not received 
approval to receive and dispense marijuana for Ladd Huffman from the Drug 
Enforcement Administration, the National Institute on Drug Abuse had not 
shipped any marijuana for Ladd Huffman.  Therefore, under the March 1992 
decision of the Secretary, the National Institute on Drug Abuse would not 
supply marijuana for Ladd Huffman's single-patient IND.

     15.  There were 27 additional single-patient INDs that FDA had 
allowed to proceed which had not received marijuana.  Under the 
Secretary's March 1992 decision, marijuana would not be supplied for 
these INDs by the National Institute on Drug Abuse. 

     16.  In March 1992, as a result of the Secretary's decision, I 
contacted the sponsoring physicians of the INDs for Ladd Huffman and 
other patients who were not already receiving marijuana to advise them 
that the National Institute on Drug Abuse would not supply marijuana for 
their single-patient INDs.  I also advised the sponsoring physicians of 
other treatment options for their patients' conditions and the 
availability of referrals to experts at the National Institutes of 
Health, Public Health Service, Department of Health and Human Services. 
The single-patient INDs for these individuals were cancelled.

     17.  FDA cannot disclose information regarding patients receiving 
marijuana under single-patient INDs without such patients' consent. 

     Pursuant to 28 U.S.C. &#167; 1746, I declare under penalty of perjury 
that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, the foregoing is true and 
correct. 

     Executed on: June 16, 1993, at Rockville, MD. 

Daniel A. Spyker, PhD, M.D.
Medical Officer
Pilot Drug Evaluation Staff
Center for Drug Evaluation	
and Research
United States Food and Drug	
Administration 
</PRE>

</BODY>

</HTML>
</DOC>