
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B08-214</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA096-001028-B015-45</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.bxa.doc.gov:80/supp5.htm 207.96.70.148 19970215010035 text/html 10412
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 21:01:36 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 10240
Last-modified: Wed, 08 Jan 1997 00:54:18 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Supplement No. 5 to Part 742--Key Escrow or Key Recovery Agent 
Criteria, Security Policies, and Key Escrow or Key Recovery Procedures</title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="FFFFFF">
<pre>
Supplement No. 5 to Part 742--Key Escrow or Key Recovery Agent 
Criteria, Security Policies, and Key Escrow or Key Recovery Procedures

Key Escrow or Key Recovery Agent Requirements; Security Policies; Key 
Escrow or Key Recovery Procedures

    This Supplement sets forth criteria that the Department of 
Commerce will use to approve key recovery agents to support approval 
of the export or reexport of key recovery encryption items 
controlled for EI reasons under ECCNs 5A002 and 5D002. Any 
arrangements between the exporter or reexporter and the key recovery 
agent must reflect the provisions contained in this Supplement in a 
manner satisfactory to BXA, in conjunction with other agencies. This 
Supplement outlines the criteria for employing key recovery agent 
personnel for key recovery procedures. An applicant for eligibility 
to export or reexport key recovery items shall provide, or cause the 
proposed key recovery agent to provide, to BXA sufficient 
information concerning any proposed key recovery agent arrangements 
to permit BXA's evaluation of the key recovery agent's security 
policies, key recovery procedures, and suitability and 
trustworthiness to maintain the confidentiality of the key(s) or 
other material/information required to decrypt ciphertext. The key 
recovery agent, who must be approved by BXA, may be the applicant 
for the classification request. When there is no key recovery agent 
involved, or the customer will self-escrow abroad, with or without a 
legal obligation to the exporter, the customer must be approved by 
BXA. BXA retains the right, in addition to any other remedies, to 
revoke eligibility for License Exception KMI if BXA determines that 
a key recovery agent no longer meets these criteria. The 
requirements related to the suitability and trustworthiness, 
security policies, and key recovery procedures of the key recovery 
agent shall be made terms and conditions of the License Exception 
for key recovery items. BXA shall require the key recovery agent to 
provide a representation that it will comply with such terms and 
conditions.

    Note: Use of key recovery agents located outside the U.S. is 
permitted if acceptable to BXA in consultation with the host 
government, as appropriate.

I. Key Recovery Agent Requirements

    (1)(a) A key recovery agent must identify by name, date and 
place of birth, and social security number, individual(s) who:
    (i) Is/are directly involved in the escrowing of key(s) or other 
material/information required to decrypt ciphertext; or
    (ii) Have access to key(s) or other material/information 
required to decrypt ciphertext, or
    (iii) Have access to information concerning requests for key(s) 
or other material/information required to decrypt ciphertext; or
    (iv) Respond to requests for key(s) or other material/
information required to decrypt ciphertext; or
    (v) Is/are in control of the key recovery agent and have access 
or authority to obtain key(s) or other material/information required 
to decrypt ciphertext, and
    (b) Must certify that such individual(s) meet the requirements 
of the following paragraphs (b)(i) or (b)(ii). BXA reserves the 
right to determine at any time the suitability and trustworthiness 
of such individual(s). Evidence of an individual's suitability and 
trustworthiness shall include:
    (i) Information indicating that the individual(s):
    (A) Has no criminal convictions of any kind or pending criminal 
charges of any kind;
    (B) Has not breached fiduciary responsibilities (e.g., has not 
violated any surety or performance bonds); and
    (C) Has favorable results of a credit check; or,
    (ii) Information that the individual(s) has an active U.S. 
government security clearance of Secret or higher issued or updated 
within the last five years.
    (2) The key recovery agent shall timely disclose to BXA when an 
individual no longer meets the requirements of paragraphs 
I.(1)(b)(i) or (ii).
    (3) A key recovery agent must, to remain eligible for License 
Exception KMI, identify to BXA by name, date and place of birth, and 
social security number any new individual(s)
who will assume the responsibilities set forth in paragraph I.(1)(a) 
of this Supplement. Before that individual(s) assumes such 
responsibilities, the key recovery agent must certify to BXA that 
the individual(s) meets the criteria set forth in subparagraphs 
I.(1)(b)(i) or (b)(ii) of this Supplement. BXA reserves the right to 
determine at any time the suitability and trustworthiness of such 
personnel.
    (4) If ownership or control of a key recovery agent is 
transferred, no export may take place under previously issued 
approvals until the successor key recovery agent complies with the 
criteria of this Supplement.
    (5) Key recovery agents shall submit suitable evidence of the 
key recovery agent's corporate viability and financial 
responsibility (e.g., a certificate of good standing from the state 
of incorporation, credit reports, and errors/omissions insurance).
    (6) Key recovery agents shall disclose to BXA any of the 
following which have occurred within the ten years prior to the 
application:
    (a) Federal or state felony convictions of the business;
    (b) Material adverse civil fraud judgments or settlements; and
    (c) Debarments from federal, state, or local government 
contracting.
    The applicant shall also timely disclose to BXA the occurrence 
of any of the foregoing during the use of License Exception KMI.
    (7) Key recovery agent(s) shall designate an individual(s) to be 
the security and operations officer(s).
    (8) A key recovery agent may be internal to a user's 
organization and may consist of one or more individuals. BXA may 
approve such key recovery agents if sufficient information is 
provided to demonstrate that appropriate safeguards will be employed 
in handling key recovery requests from government entities. These 
safeguards should ensure: the key recovery agent's structural 
independence from the rest of the organization; security; and 
confidentiality.

II. Security Policies

    (1) Key recovery agents must implement security policies that 
assure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the 
key(s) or other material/information required for decryption of the 
ciphertext.
    (a) Procedures to assure confidentiality shall include:
    (i) Encrypting all key(s) or other material/information required 
to decrypt ciphertext while in storage, transmission, or transfer; 
or
    (ii) Applying reasonable measures to limit access to the 
database (e.g. using keyed or combination locks on the entrances to 
escrow facilities and limiting the personnel with knowledge of or 
access to the keys/combinations).
    (b) Procedures to assure the integrity of the database (i.e. 
assuring the key(s) and other material/information required to 
decrypt ciphertext are protected against unauthorized changes) shall 
include the use of access controls such as database password 
controls, digital signatures, system auditing, and physical access 
restrictions.
    (c) Procedures to assure the availability of the database (i.e. 
assuring that key(s) and other material/information required to 
decrypt ciphertext are retrievable at any time) shall include system 
redundance, physical security, and the use of cryptography to 
control access.
    (2) Policies and procedures shall be designed and operated so 
that a failure by a single person, procedure, or mechanism does not 
compromise the confidentiality, integrity and availability of 
key(s)or other material/information required to decrypt ciphertext. 
Security policies and procedures may include, but are not limited 
to, multi-person control of access to recoverable keys, split keys, 
and back-up capabilities.
    (3) Key recovery agents shall implement policies that protect 
against unauthorized disclosure of information regarding whose 
encryption material is stored, the fact that key(s) or other 
material/information required to decrypt ciphertext was requested or 
provided, and the identity of a requester. Procedures to assure the 
confidentiality of this information shall include those described in 
paragraph II.(1)(a) of this supplement.
    (4) Key recovery agents shall provide to BXA prompt notice of a 
compromise of a security policy or of the confidentiality of key(s) 
or other material/information required to decrypt ciphertext.

III. Key Recovery Procedures

    (1) Key recovery agents shall maintain the ability to make the 
key(s) or other material/information required to decrypt ciphertext 
available until notified otherwise by BXA. Key recovery agents shall 
make requested key(s) or other material/information required to 
decrypt ciphertext available, to the extent required by the request, 
within two hours from the time they receive a request from a 
government agency acting under appropriate legal authority.
    (2) Key recovery agents shall maintain data regarding key 
recovery requests received, release of key(s) or other material/
information required to decrypt ciphertext, database changes, system 
administration access, and dates of such events for purposes of 
audits by BXA.
    (3) The key recovery agent must transfer all key recovery 
equipment, key(s) and/or other material/information required to 
decrypt ciphertext, key recovery database, and all administrative 
information necessary to its key recovery operations to another key 
recovery agent approved by BXA in the event that:
    (a) The key recovery agent dissolves or otherwise terminates 
escrowing operations, or
    (b) BXA determines that there is a risk of such dissolution or 
termination, or
    (c) BXA determines that the key recovery agent is no longer 
suitable or trustworthy.

</pre>
</body>
</html>

</DOC>