
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B08-215</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA096-001028-B015-78</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.bxa.doc.gov:80/supp6.htm 207.96.70.148 19970215010048 text/html 8950
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 14 Feb 1997 21:01:51 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 8779
Last-modified: Wed, 08 Jan 1997 00:32:24 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Supplement No. 6 to Part 742--Guidelines for Submitting a 
Classification Request for a Mass Market Software Product That Contains 
Encryption </title>
</head>
<body bgcolor="FFFFFF">
<pre>

Supplement No. 6 to Part 742--Guidelines for Submitting a 
Classification Request for a Mass Market Software Product That Contains 
Encryption

    Classification requests for release of certain mass market 
encryption software from EI controls must be submitted on Form BXA-
748P, in accordance with Sec. 748.3 of the EAR. To expedite review 
of the request, clearly mark the envelope ``Attn.: Mass Market 
Encryption Software Classification Request''. In Block 9: Special 
Purpose of the Form BXA-748P, you must insert the phrase ``Mass 
Market Encryption Software. Failure to insert this phrase will delay 
processing. In addition, the Bureau of Export Administration 
recommends that such requests be delivered via courier service to: 
Bureau of Export Administration, Office of Exporter Services, Room 
2705, 14th Street and Pennsylvania Ave., N.W., Washington, D.C. 
20230.
    (a) Requests for mass market encryption software that meet the 
criteria in paragraph (a)(2) of this Supplement will be processed in 
seven (7) working days from receipt of a properly completed request. 
Those requests for mass market encryption software that meet the 
criteria of paragraph (a)(1) of this Supplement only will be 
processed in fifteen (15) working days from receipt of a properly 
completed request. When additional information is requested, the 
request will be processed within 15 working days of the receipt of 
the requested information.
    (1) A mass market software product that meets all the criteria 
established in this paragraph will be processed in fifteen (15) 
working days from receipt of the properly completed request:
    (i) The commodity must be mass market software. Mass market 
software is computer software that is available to the public via 
sales from stock at retail selling points by means of over-the-
counter transactions, mail order transactions, or telephone call 
transactions;
    (ii) The software must be designed for installation by the user 
without further substantial support by the supplier. Substantial 
support does not include telephone (voice only) help line services 
for installation or basic operation, or basic operation training 
provided by the supplier; and
    (iii) The software includes encryption for data confidentiality.
    (2) A mass market software product that meets all the criteria 
established in this paragraph will be processed in seven working 
days from receipt of the properly completed request:
    (i) The software meets all the criteria established in paragraph 
(a)(1) (i) through (iii) of this Supplement;
    (ii) The data encryption algorithm must be RC4 and/or RC2 with a 
key space no longer than 40 bits. The RC4 and RC2 algorithms are 
proprietary to RSA Data Security, Inc. To ensure that the subject 
software is properly licensed and correctly implemented, contact RSA 
Data Security, (415) 595-8782;
    (iii) If both RC4 and RC2 are used in the same software, their 
functionality must be separate. That is, no data can be operated 
sequentially on by both routines or multiply by either routine;
    (iv) The software must not allow the alteration of the data 
encryption mechanism and its associated key spaces by the user or 
any other program;
    (v) The key exchange used in data encryption must be:
    (A) A public key algorithm with a key space less than or equal 
to a 512 bit modulus and/or;
    (B) A symmetrical algorithm with a key space less than or equal 
to 64 bits; and
    (vi) The software must not allow the alteration of the key 
management mechanism and its associated key space by the user or any 
other program.
    (b) Instructions for the preparation and submission of a 
classification request that is eligible for seven day handling are 
as follows:
    (1) If the software product meets the criteria in paragraph 
(a)(2) of this Supplement, you must call the Department of Commerce 
on (202) 482-0092 to obtain a test vector. This test vector must be 
used in the classification process to confirm that the software has 
properly implemented the approved encryption algorithms.
    (2) Upon receipt of the test vector, the applicant must encrypt 
the test plain text input provided using the commodity's encryption 
routine (RC2 and/or RC4) with the given key value. The applicant 
should not pre-process the test vector by any compression or any 
other routine that changes its format. Place the resultant test 
cipher text output in hexadecimal format on an attachment to form 
BXA-748P.
    (3) You must provide the following information in a cover letter 
to the classification request:
    (i) Clearly state at the top of the page ``Mass Market 
Encryption Software--7 Day Expedited Review Requested'';
    (ii) State that you have reviewed and determined that the 
software subject to the classification request meets the criteria of 
paragraph (a)(2) of this Supplement;
    (iii) State the name of the single software product being 
submitted for review. A separate classification request is required 
for each product;
    (iv) State how the software has been written to preclude user 
modification of the encryption algorithm, key management mechanism, 
and key space;
    (v) Provide the following information for the software product:
    (A) Whether the software uses the RC2 and/or the RC4 algorithm 
and how the algorithm(s) is used. If both of these algorithms are 
used in the same product, also state how the functionality of each 
is separated to assure that no data is operated on by both 
algorithms;
    (B) Pre-processing information of plain text data before 
encryption (e.g. the addition of clear text header information or 
compression of the data);
    (C) Post-processing information of cipher text data after 
encryption (e.g. the addition of clear text header information or 
packetization of the encrypted data);
    (D) Whether a public key algorithm or a symmetric key algorithm 
is used to encrypt keys and the applicable key space;
    (E) For classification requests regarding source code:
    (1) Reference the applicable executable product that has already 
received a one-time review;
    (2) Include whether the source code has been modified by 
deleting the encryption algorithm, its associated key management 
routine(s), and all calls to the algorithm from the source code, or 
by providing the encryption algorithm and associated key management 
routine(s) in object code with all calls to the algorithm hidden. 
You must provide the technical details on how you have modified the 
source code;
    (3) Include a copy of the sections of the source code that 
contain the encryption algorithm, key management routines, and their 
related calls; and
    (F) Provide any additional information which you believe would 
assist in the review process.
    (c) Instructions for the preparation and submission of a 
classification request that is eligible for 15 day handling are as 
follows:
    (1) If the software product meets only the criteria in paragraph 
(a)(1) of this supplement, you must prepare a classification 
request. Send the original to the Bureau of Export Administration. 
Send a copy by Express Mail to:
    Attn.: 15 day Encryption Request Coordinator P.O. Box 246 
Annapolis Junction, MD 20701-0246.
    (2) You must provide the following information in a cover letter 
to the classification request:
    (i) Clearly state at the top of the page ``Mass Market Software 
and Encryption--15 Day Expedited Review Requested'';
    (ii) State that you have reviewed and determined that the 
software subject of the classification request, meets the criteria 
of paragraph (a)(1) of this Supplement;
    (iii) State the name of the single software product being 
submitted for review. A separate classification request is required 
for each product;
    (iv) State that a duplicate copy, in accordance with paragraph 
(c)(1) of this Supplement, has been sent to the 15 day Encryption 
Request Coordinator; and
    (v) Ensure that the information provided includes brochures or 
other documentation or specifications relating to the software, as 
well as any additional information which you believe would assist in 
the review process.
    (3) Contact the Bureau of Export Administration on (202) 482-
0092 prior to submission of the classification to facilitate the 
submission of proper documentation.

</pre>
</body>
</html>


</DOC>