
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B19-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B043-163</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/COPTIC/wells2.html 206.61.184.43 19970122072545 text/html 28798
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:25:30 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:07:31 GMT
Content-length: 28582
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD><TITLE>History of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church</TITLE>
<META NAME="AUTHOR" CONTENTS="Wells, Walter">
<META NAME="DATE" CONTENTS="1979">
<META NAME="SUMMARY" CONTENTS="History of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church">
<META NAME="KEYWORDS" CONTENTS="Coptic, Rastafari, ganja, Wells">
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF" LINK="#0000FF" VLINK="#FF0000" ALINK="#FF00FF">
<PRE>HISTORY OF THE ETHIOPIAN ZION COPTIC CHURCH 
 
By Walter Wells, Spiritual Leader, Servant of Goud 
 
     "When the strong oppress the weak, and men sell, or condone the 
selling of, their brother's liberty, to achieve fading gold  SLAVERY, 
OPPRESSlON, HATRED and CRlME, will be the order of the day.  Man must 
examine his conscience to see if what he pours out, is what he would 
readily receive" -- The Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church. 
 
     It has been said by modern historians, that the scarcity of written 
records has enshrouded the history of Africa in mystery and ignorance: 
this is not so.  The first recorded history is man, and so history could 
not be that written piece of paper, but the experience of an individual 
or people written on the tablets of man's heart.  The history therefore 
of any Nation belongs only to its people, and so the history of we 
Ethiopians has been told from generation to generation even until this 
day. 
 
     It is for this reason that, although the forces of evil conspire 
against us, we of the Coptic Faith know that the leopard cannot change 
its spots, neither can we alter the commandments and precepts handed down 
by our fathers; from generation to generation, as a guiding light to 
lighten all Nations, even the Gentiles, and for the glorification of his 
people Israel. 
 
THE COPTIC DEITY. 
 
     The Deity of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church may be unknown to the 
billions of Gentiles scattered over the earth, with the exception of the 
faithful few who are fighting bravely to guide their Nation's life.  
However it is not new to the millions of blackman scattered over the 
earth like sand on the sea shore, even those in America and elsewhere.  
It is an inward spirit that once guided Israel along the troubled waters 
of the past; which he lost because of his disobedience to his teacher and 
creator, and received the punishment of slavery as a curse; under seven 
different world powers starting with Egypt, to the British American world 
power of today. 
 
     Punishment by slavery, because blackman had in ages before, and even 
today, stooped as a scum upon the earth, inferior to the entire race of 
human beings, and has sold his brother into slavery to be used and 
tormented by his enemies as a mockery upon our creative heritage that 
even today, had not their been a righteous branch among us, we also would 
be like Sodom and Gommorrah.  This dastardly act was contrary to Goud's 
declaration of individual freedom for every man on earth.  Slavery among 
Israel came about because we failed to respect each other and in time we 
became covetous and rebellious against each other.  There was no 
brotherly louv or trust among brethren of the different tribes and so the 
strong preyed upon the weak, and sold his own brother into slavery  for 
the sake of money (caesar), which Europeans taught us was the savior from 
our miseries.  Before this, when we walked in obedience to Goud, we were 
taught to keep the commandments and walk in christian principles.  
Charity, justice, equality, manliness and respect were also taught. 
 
     That spirit of unity, that existed in Israel before they 
transgressed and were placed into captivity, is still burning and will 
one day ignite into an eternal flame of desire; the desire to free 
themselves once and for all from the political slavery brought upon them 
through their own foolish imaginations, which caused them to be 
disobedient to Goud.  The Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church is now in the 
process of igniting this flame, and very soon we will see billions of 
blackman worldwide and the strangers within their gates  uniting and 
giving acclaim to RASTAFARI, KING, CREATOR; who with blessings has 
returned to reign, reign over HIS PEOPLE; - ISRAEL. 
 
HISTORY OF A PEOPLE. 
 
From Egypt to Rome. 
 
     The history of Israel's suffering under slavery during the time of 
the first six world powers, Egypt, Assyria, Great Babylon, Meda-Persia, 
Greece and Rome, is well recorded in the Holy Bible, the guidebook of 
every Nation to resurrect the spirit of moral consciousness, for a moral 
and spiritual rearmament - man in relationship with his Creator. 
 
     What is unknown to the millions who have been lost in vanity fair, 
including the millions of blackman around the world, whose heritage and 
dynasty the Coptic Church now declare, is THE HISTORY OF THE BLACKMAN 
TODAY, FROM THE PERIOD OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.  Let us now continue the 
history of their sufferings, from the latter part of the Roman Empire 
until today, the day upon which you read this epistle. 
 
From Rome to the British American world power. 
 
     During the latter days of the Roman Empire, the church of Rome, or 
the Catholic Church as we know it today, was the only recognized church 
worldwide.  lt. was not until the period of revolution both in England 
and on the continent, that the church of England, or Anglican church, was 
formed, then the Quakers, etc.  The Pope of Rome, who was the head of the 
church, was regarded as the most powerful man in the earth, and received 
obeisance from kings, princes, cardinals, bishops, abbots and priests. 
 
     There were many Nations which were oppressed by the Roman Empire 
such as Britain, Spain, Portugal and France.  All the great trades were 
carried out by the merchants of Venice.  As a result, other Nations made 
their own routes of trade by sailing along the coasts of Africa.  The 
first to make contact with the natives were the Portuguese during the 
sixteenth century.  They bought blackman as slaves from the Arabs who had 
earlier bought them from our own black brothers who had grown to be 
covetous and rebellious to Goud, as shown earlier in this article. (See 
Coptic Deity,  2) 
 
Blackman Deceived. 
 
     In the sixteenth century when the Portuguese and Spanish adventurers 
and oppressors started commerce on the continent of Africa, America and 
the Far East, they were accompanied by the Roman Catholic Church, who 
under the disguise of missionary priests were used as the agents of pagan 
religion to spread propaganda and subvert the Goud given Culture and 
beliefs of the people who they found living in the lands wherein they 
traded and settled.  Because we warred among each other, we were 
classified as barbarians, wild animals who needed to be civilised. 
 
     Their first deception would be to use their gifts of enchantments to 
capture the moral spirit of the people.  When they had won the 
hospitality of the people, they would indoctrinate them with their pagan 
Roman religion of a sky god called Geysus, hoping they could persuade the 
natives to give their praise and anthem to their Pope in Rome.  This they 
did under the pretense of civilisation. 
 
     So flourishing and financially successful was the selling of 
blackman into slavery, that wars broke out among the traders for 
supremacy and full control of the trade.  Britain finally won supremacy 
in the eighteenth century. 
 
PUNISHMENT UNDER THE LAST PLAGUE. 
 
The seventh and last plague; British/American world power. 
 
     The history of every country today gives a clear picture of the 
early stages of slavery under the British American world power.  History 
shows that of over twenty to twenty-four million Blackman enslaved from 
Africa only fifteen to twenty million survived the horrors meted out to 
them during their trips to the Americas.  The Coptic Church today holds 
the British Imperial government responsible for the blood of over four to 
nine million Black Israel massacred under a bandulu government during the 
period of the slave trade. 
 
     Our suffering, even to the period of emancipation in 1838, is well 
known and would not be wise to deal with in detail.  Let me bring you 
closer, however, to the present situation, as it affects us today; and so 
I start with the period 1765.  This was the period Brother Editor, when 
you the suffering people of America, pressured by your colonial masters 
to the point of extinction, placed your shoulders to the wheel in a 
united effort, to once and for all remove the shackles of British 
supremacy and corrupt oppressive administration on your colonies. 
 
     You stood up not because you were British subjects on British soil, 
yet because you had a moral conscience in the equality and rights of 
every man to live upon the earth as a free man; without enslavement from 
his brother.  We as a people admired your courage for the steps you took 
in those times.  However, one-hundred years after, when we, who were 
considered by your colonial masters as barbarians of an inferior race, 
could no longer bear the pressures of oppression and human destruction 
laid upon us, and having had our long years of grievances fall upon deaf 
ears, our race, under the able leadership of Paul Bogle, National Hero 
and Servant of Goud, rose to the challenge.  Yet because we were divided 
among ourselves, we failed and Bogle was executed by his oppressors. 
 
     As the years rolled on, the British world power by itself became 
weakened, as many of her colonies gained independence.  As a result, she 
had to share her power with her younger sister America.  The centre of 
power was removed from Britain and vested in a mixed worldwide 
international political organisation, the League of Nations, now called 
the United Nations, a cage of hateful and unclean, corrupt political 
birds. 
 
PUNISHMENT UNDER UNITED NATIONS WORLD POLITICS. 
 
Rise of a Prophet. 
 
     Fifty years after the execution of Bogle, and around the same time, 
when the British Empire fell and they conspired in setting up the United 
Nations, Goud rose up the Prophet Marcus Garvey in Jamaica, the 
headquarters of the slave trade in the West Indies, the now head of 
attraction and Biblical lisle of Patmos, where the head of civilisation 
is.  His message was the same as that of Bogle, only that as a son he was 
wiser and did not believe in the use of guns and bayonets.  His mission 
was as a forerunner to Louv Williams, a faithful disciple of Marcus and 
upon whose shoulder the mantle of leadership fell, so that we, both Jews 
and Gentiles, can partake of this great spiritual resurrection.  Marcus 
had started the preparation for the spiritual resurrection of the world 
at large.  However, because of the animosity and division between black 
and white, and the scar of slavery and demolition of his people, he had 
to set about to rebuild the moral conscience of black man, who is the 
most precious gem, the chosen race of Goud. 
 
     It is the same United Nations of today who fought against the Deity 
of Marcus and persecuted him, even as the American government, an agent 
of the United Nations, is today persecuting the Coptic Church.  Every 
nation fights against Herb, the Sacrifice of the Black Goud.  They claim 
they fight against it because it is a United Nations agreement.  Let the 
world know that this United Nations is only a worldwide political 
conspiracy of 1914 when the British world power failed; and when blackman 
should have been redeemed to his home land, they conspired and set up 
Politics and thus divided the black suffering masses under the bogus 
agency called the United Nations, who in its effort to keep the people 
divided, and thus weak, made their Sacrament to their Goud, the Herb, 
illegal by their illegal councils. 
 
     During the period of Marcus Garvey, a new spirit of unity had 
awakened in the people, both in Jamaica and America, as it is today 
through the teachings of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church.  As a result, 
the political leaders of the time conspired against him and imprisoned 
him, at the same time spreading propaganda that he was dead.  By so doing 
they were able to kill the fire kindled in the hearts of the people, by 
this great moral teacher. 
 
Early days of Tribulation. 
 
     After the imprisonment of the Prophet Marcus; the lot of the black 
masses worldwide became unbearable, as they were brutally manipulated by 
the society of the time.  So severely oppressed were they by their 
colonial masters, that even when in 1937 to 1938, when Bustamante 
declared himself as an advocate of the people, he was received and looked 
upon as the Moses who would deliver and return them to the Promised Land, 
wherein dwells Louv, Peace, Happiness and Prosperity.  The promise of 
deliverance and final peace of mind was promised through our forefather 
Abraham, and this promise still lives in the hearts of millions worldwide 
today. 
 
     When Bustamante came to Jamaica in the 1930's, he was unknown to the 
masses.  He later started business as a money lender among the poor 
masses and, by doing so, was able to win the confidence of the people.  
With the assistance of St. William Grant, one of Garvey's chief 
lieutenants, he was able to capture the hearts of the people, who thought 
and looked upon him as the Moses who would deliver them from their 
perils.  However, Bustamante was not a national figure, and so he could 
not represent the welfare of a national people.  His help to the masses 
was only an opportunity to seek power and riches for himself and to 
further divide the race against itself. 
 
     As the prophecy said, "Smite the Shepherd and the sheep will be 
scattered."  The masses who were left without any moral leader to cater 
for their welfare, adhered to the leadership of Bustamante.  Because he 
was not ordained as a priest or leader of Goud's people, Bustamante 
failed to resurrect the moral and ethical principles of the people and to 
guide them to a land of peace and safety as promised to our forefather 
Abraham, that Patriarch of old.  Instead, he could only organise the 
people into divided political forces, thus weakening their strength for 
liberating themselves  for instead of the masses on the one hand and the 
colonial masters on the other, the people were now divided among 
themselves under the disguise of POLITICS.  Trade unions were set up to 
control the people's labour; and the same oppressors were the ones who 
negotiated the wages of the suffering people, being ably supported by 
these political weaklings called Trade unions. 
 
     Soon after, the black masses lost the spirit of a moral awakening, 
kindled in their hearts by that great moral teacher, Marcus Messiah 
Garvey.  Many of his ardent followers like St. William Grant were 
captured by these political forces, who with the help of the various 
pagan religious groups, returned to the pagan religious practice of 
worshipping an imaginary sky god. 
 
THE DAWN OF A NEW MILLENNIUM. 
 
"LOUV" the first fruit of them that slept. 
 
     Since the advent of politics upon the black masses in Jamaica, we 
succumbed to the dark shadows that loomed around us; and many slept in 
darkness, having no hope of attaining liberty except on the wheels of the 
political system which was instituted by the "Buckie Massa's" of the 
time.  Yet, while many slept and became dormant in their spirit, there 
was one disciple of Marcus who was fervent in the spirit of Wisdom, 
Knowledge and Understanding, who took the mantle of Faith, Hope and 
Charity, to lighten the pathway of us, the masses, in this present 
generation, so that we could not in this time be deceived, as in the time 
of our fathers. 
 
     I speak of Louv Williams, the first fruit of us who are in darkness 
within this dispensation.  Louv Williams' charge was for the spiritual 
awakening of his people from the bonds of moral slavery, serfs and peons, 
and the inferiority complex which we of the black masses had adopted as 
our final lot in today's world. 
 
     Louv resurrected our moral values and purpose in life, placed us on 
the right path to individual salvation, as was our custom and culture 
before we were placed under the awful curse of slavery.  The final advent 
started in the late 1930's when politics was introduced upon the poor 
masses of Jamaica.  Louv Williams, who would not bow to political forces, 
first started his declaration of Rastafari's Holy Trinity (The Man, The 
Herb and The Word), the true Deity of Marcus, at Mountain View, 
Southeastern St. Andrew, Jamaica.  During this period, there were 
brethren like Count Ossie, Jah Lloyd and Bongo Blackheart (now of the 
natty dread faith) among many others attending school at Jerusalem 
schoolroom, under the distinguished tutorship of Louv Williams. 
 
     Because many who came to the knowledge were disobedient and contrary 
to sound doctrine, they later left the faith and were captured by the 
princes of the air.  They adopted a false culture as taught by Hilton and 
others who were captivated by the religious political forces of 1938.  
This false doctrine of Rastafari rose up in the 1950's with its roots in 
the western section of the corporate area of Kingston, Jamaica, and was 
formulated by the unprincipled ones in Louv Williams' Camp, who would not 
live up to the Divine principles of the Holy Bible as taught, and were 
therefore not allowed to partake in the Sacraments, as they were 
disorderly.  These, not spiritual minded, soon withered away when 
tribulations started, and so went and invented their own version of 
Rastafari, touching only their geneology, yet not the Divinity of 
PERSONAL ACCEPTANCE through the SON. 
 
     During the early days of Louv's declaration at Mountain View, we of 
the masses were unable to own any land of consequent value.  As a result, 
most of our Camp sites were on captured government lands.  We were in 
those times called squatters by our religious and political oppressors 
and society as a whole.  TODAY THE SQUATTERS ARE STILL HERE WAITING ON 
THEIR JUSTICE.  In the early part of 1960, after many attacks upon 
brethren by a wicked covetous and corrupted Poor Lice (police) force, the 
Camp was removed to August Town in the hills of St. Andrew, Jamaica.  It 
was first sited on University of the West Indies lands now subdivided 
into the land settlement called Kintyre.  The Camp was sited at Wilpit, 
across the Hope river, on a portion of land legally owned by one Mammy 
Louv, but captured and occupied for a long time by a Coptic brother named 
Son Latuce.  This brother later left the Faith, joined the security 
guard, and was stabbed to death. 
 
     During our stay at Wilpit, we were subjected to various political 
harassment, and even one present day Jamaican Minister of government, 
Keble-you-Feeble-you-Dunn, who was M.P. for the political constituency 
where the Camp was located, fought against us, saying the Camp should be 
removed seven miles from the university, as they could not take the 
Kuminas that we played.  The Camp was then moved to Hall's Delight, 
further in the hills, on lands owned by a brother named Massa Bouy 
Brooks.  Upon this spot mighty works were performed, the history of which 
will be recorded for future volumes.  It is, however, worthy to note at 
this stage that during the era of Marcus, and the early advent of Louv, 
we as black brethren did not know that the white man also would be saved 
in Goud's eternal kingdom.  This feeling came about because of their 
terrible brutalising of the race and the conflict caused by the RAPE OF 
ETHIOPIA by these WHITE EUROPEANS. 
 
     However, before he transfigured, Brother Louv prophesied the 
unification of black and white under one Holy Trinity.  We witnessed the 
fulfillment of this prophecy when, in the latter part of the 1960's, we 
saw the first white man set foot in Camp, and, being individually 
convinced of the TRUTH of the doctrine, accepted Christ as his Saviour, 
confessing his SINS, and partaking in the daily worship, equally with the 
black brethren.  Louv also prophesied that we would witness the 
resurrection of the Eternal Spirit on the third Day, meaning the third 
and eternal leadership in this final dispensation of time of the Church 
worldwide, which is today's period (THESE ARE THE GENERATION OF US THAT 
SEEK THY FACE O JESUS Selah).  In 1969, Brother Louv transfigured and 
ascended to his Brethren. 
 
Coming of the Son: A short work in Righteousness. 
 
     History records that, like in the era of Marcus, many brethren who 
were weak in the Faith, became dis-illusioned on his departure, and so 
were swallowed up by the various political elements of the world.  So it 
was also in the period after the transfiguration and ascension of Louv.  
Many brethren who were weak in the Faith, and many who did not lay his 
great spiritual teachings to heart, were early led into captivity, and 
many forgot the principles and precepts for which they once stood. 
 
     However, there were a few who still kept the zeal burning, and chief 
among them was one filled with the spirit of Grace and Truth, Humble 
Mantle of Louv in 1969 gathered together Louv's brethren, who were 
scattered abroad.  It was Brother Ivy who fully opened the doors of 
Salvation to the white inhabitants of the world within this dispensation, 
and taught black and white to unite together for one common cause (not 
for the liberation of the race only, yet), worldwide liberation from SIN 
and a return to the spirit of oneness in Jes-us our Lord and King 
Eternal, knowing that there is only one Goud for all races.  During his 
period of leadership, he prophesied the removal of the Church to the 
western section of the island.  His work was a short work in 
Righteousness, to unite mankind in one common cause.  He transfigured and 
ascended to his brethren in 1970. 
 
FINAL DAYS OF TRIBULATION. 
 
Brother "KEEP"_The shepherd of Brethren. 
 
     Those he mark for his own he keepeth them.  In 1970, Elder "Keeper 
of the Flock" Gordon took over the Mantle of leadership, thus, fulfilling 
the prophecy of Brother Louv of his resurrected Spirit in the third and 
eternal leadership of the Church worldwide as we now see it today.  It 
was during his early period of divine leadership that the Camp was 
removed from Hall's Delight in St. Andrew, Jamaica, to the Crown Land, 
Trelawny, in the western section of the island, thus, fulfilling another 
prophecy as foretold by Brother Ivy earlier.  From this new site many 
received Salvation, both Jews and Gentiles, and so the Church grew from 
strength to strength, increasing in numbers daily. 
 
     Within this period we were able to plan constructively the proper 
course on which to sail.  We were able to increase our agricultural 
production on a better planned basis, chiefly because we were on our own 
lands.  Cattle rearing was done extensively, as also poultry, etc.  Even 
upon our own lands we were subjected to political harassment; and one 
government minister even remarked that because we were teaching the 
people to be independent, he could not get anyone to work on his banana 
plantation.  During this period, we had our fields destroyed by 
government army helicopters which landed in our fields, destroying our 
crops and our house tops.  We were falsely locked up, then released 
without being charged.  Our legal properties were seized, and some 
stolen, under the disguise of law.  Our divine services were broken up at 
random. 
 
     The area, however, was mountainous, and very soon there was not 
enough pastureland for our cattle, and so, after settling in various 
parishes, such as St. Elizabeth, Manchester and Kingston, we finally 
settled at Coptic Heights, St. Thomas, once more in the East, for the 
final battle with modern Pharaoh.  With more land space, we were able to 
expand our resources and make sounder planning.  We were able to 
establish a fully accredited farming institution: - The Ethiopian Zion 
Coptic Church Farms Eternal Limited, compromising over one thousand acres 
of land fully cultivated and pastured.  On this farm we cultivate, 
vegetables, ground provisions, fruits, peanuts, escallion, thyme, onions, 
peas, melons, pumpkins, okras, bananas, sugar cane.  There is also over 
one thousand head of beef and dairy cattle, horses, donkeys, goats, 
sheep, mules and over two thousand head of poultry.  A native lumber 
industry is also operated by cutting wood from the trees on the farm and 
sometimes buying from outside supplies.  Coal is burned for the trade, 
and a stone quarry is operated.  We were also able to establish a 
trucking department which, along with the produce of the farm, assists 
the brethren in their everyday needs.  Today, as we look back at our past 
journey, and of a vast experiment of six thousand years, which are now 
coming to a close, the achievement that we have made, we now know that 
these could not be achieved by black alone, or white alone, yet by a 
united people, fulfilling the Mysteries of Goud in those who fear him and 
keep his commandments. 
 
COPTIC FOR OUR LIBERATION. 
 
     Coptic is the Bible understanding in this present generation.  The 
entire world today is burdened with SIN, from which, up to now, they have 
refused to be liberated. 
 
(1) Religion has failed to inspire the generation of today, because their 
doctrine of a sky god is bogus and without foundation, so that even the 
ministers of pagan religion are within themselves doubtful of its 
authenticity. 
 
(2) Commerce has failed, because, by their works, the inhabitants can see 
plainly that they are corrupt in their dealings and selfish in their 
gains.  This institution serves only to disorganise the people and to 
uphold the class barrier placed upon us by our slave masters, and so in 
this time we see the falling apart of Caesar's kingdom and the coming of 
Goud's divine reign on earth. 
(3) Politics, which is the third unclean spirit poured out upon the 
people, has now failed in its bid to inspire the people and lead them to 
a land of peace and safety.  Our political leaders are morally corrupted.  
They are treacherous to each other, much more the poor people.  They are 
the tools of commerce, to oppress the people so that they will be poorer 
and divided. 
 
     Coptic is the only LIGHT and SOLUTION in these times of troubled 
waters. The political leaders have left the people at the unknown 
crossroad; and all these great boasters who were acclaimed as shepherds 
of the people have now been found to be hirelings indeed. 
 
COPTIC THE SHEPHERD BRETHREN. 
 
     "I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd giveth his life for the 
sheep.  Yet he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the 
sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth; 
and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. 
 
     The hireling fleeth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for 
the sheep.  I am the good shepherd and I know my sheep and I am known of 
them.  As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay 
down my Life for the Sheep. 
 
     And other Sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must 
bring, and they will hear my voice; and there will be one fold, and one 
shepherd." 
 
     On the foundation of this Deity, handed down to us from our Father 
of old, the great Patriarch Abraham, and with the blessings he received 
from the great High Priest Melchizedek when they met in the plain of 
Mamre, the promise being from generation to generation, the Coptic 
Church, the advocate of this great spiritual Deity in these present 
times, is duty bound to enlighten those who are willing to open their 
moral equilibrium to the TRUTH as it affects them in these times. 
 
      
Reprinted by Carl E. Olsen 
Post Office Box 4091
Des Moines, Iowa 50333
(515) 262-6957 
carlolsen@mail.commonlink.com 
carlolsen@dsmnet.com 
73043.414@compuserve.com 
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>