
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B15-136</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA018-000197-B015-316</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.rw.doe.gov:80/spc_tst/ddtrb2.htm 204.4.196.7 19970106213507 text/html 15701
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Mon, 06 Jan 1997 21:33:50 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Mon, 19 Feb 1996 17:55:23 GMT
Content-length: 15526
</DOCHDR>
<html><head>
<h3><pre>
                            Remarks Prepared by
                   Daniel A. Dreyfus, Director
         Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management
                    U.S. Department of Energy
                                 
                    Program Status and Outlook

                         Presented at the
               Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board
                       1996 Winter Meeting
                         January 10, 1996
</head></pre></h3>
<body><h4><p>
Introduction
<p>
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to the Board again about the status of the program and
the outlook.  You will be hearing from several members of our staff on topics you have asked
us to address at this meeting.  Since my last meeting with you in October, there have been
some important policy developments.  I will use my time to address them.  
<p>
Current Status
<p>
I appreciated the Board's letter to Congress last month highlighting our progress at Yucca
Mountain.  We are continuing to make progress despite the draconian budget cuts in the fiscal
year 1996 appropriation.      
<p>
The tunnel boring machine continues to operate well ahead of schedule.  As of January 8, 1996,
it has excavated 12,154.8 feet (3674.3 meters) into Yucca Mountain, more than 4692 feet (1430
meters)  ahead of schedule.  Ground conditions at the repository level have been good in recent
months.  Our hypothesis that little or no water is moving at the proposed repository horizon has
been strengthened. Direct observations at the repository horizon have not revealed any potential
disqualifying conditions.  We have reached the planned location of the access point for the
underground thermal test alcove and preparations are being made  to commence the tests later
this year.  The thermal testing alcove design and the planned tests will be discussed later today.  
<p>
Later this month, we anticipate that the tunnel boring machine will also reach the first planned
access point to the Ghost Dance Fault.  I expect important results from the exploration of the
fault at repository depths.  
<p>
Program Outlook
<p>
When I spoke to you in October,  we were operating under a continuing resolution that limited
the program to $400 million.  We had taken action in September 1995 in anticipation of reduced
funding, to eliminate approximately 875 contractor positions, primarily at the Yucca Mountain 
Project.  These reductions affected the program's management and operating contractor and its
teammates, the US Geological Survey and other program participants.
<p>
Shortly after your October meeting, the Conference committee adopted the Senate's
recommendation that $400 million be made available to the program in fiscal year 1996. 
However, the Conference committee inserted language in the Appropriations Bill that stated that
$85 million of the funds appropriated shall be available only for an interim storage facility and
only upon the enactment of specific statutory authority.  This language effectively left the
program with $315 million to conduct program activities in fiscal year 1996.  
<p>
In managing this additional 20 percent cut, we have tried to avoid further impacts on the Yucca
Mountain Project.  An additional 200 positions in the areas of quality assurance, program
integration, program management and waste acceptance were eliminated.  We terminated most of
our waste acceptance, canister development, and transportation work.  We will stop work on the
multi-purpose canister system after the design phase is completed in the spring of 1996. 
Development and certification of legal-weight truck casks for transportation of spent fuel will
cease.  Our cooperative agreements will be funded at substantially reduced levels.
<p>
The Conference Report directed that the repository program be reduced to focus on the core
scientific activities and recognized that preparation and submittal of a license application would
be deferred.  As a result, of the reduced funding, our program target dates for constructing the
repository and emplacing waste also have been indefinitely deferred.  
<p>
As Congress directed, and as I proposed at your October meeting, we will concentrate our work
on the unanswered technical questions regarding the conceptual design of the repository and its
expected performance.  The objectives will be to conclude whether the technologies are in hand
to construct a repository at the Yucca Mountain site and to evaluate its probable performance
based upon the wealth of data we already have, or will have by 1998.
 <p>
We have defined a new milestone for the Yucca Mountain Project in the form of specific work
products that will contribute to a "viability assessment," which will be completed in 1998.  As I
described to you last October, the specific work products are:  
<p>
     First,  more specific design work on the critical elements of the repository and the waste
     package.  Our plan for fiscal year 1996 is to document the current conceptual level of
     detail for the repository and waste package design.  For the viability assessment, only
     those aspects of the repository and waste package design that are critical to performance,
     cost, and technical feasibility will be advanced beyond the conceptual stage.
<p>
     Second, a total system performance assessment, based upon this design concept and the
     characterization data available to us, which will describe the probable behavior of the
     repository.
<p>
     Third, a plan and cost estimate for the remaining work required to complete a license
     application.
<p>  
     And finally, an estimate of the costs to construct and operate the repository.
<p>
This viability assessment is not the same as the technical site suitability evaluation contemplated
in the previous Program Approach.  The viability assessment is intended to clarify the most
uncertain aspects of geologic disposal at Yucca Mountain.  The components of the assessment
will make important contributions toward  the development of a Secretarial recommendation to
the President and preparation of  a license application to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission;
but they will not be sufficient for either of these formal actions.
<p>
Although repository licensing activities are indefinitely deferred because of the 1996
appropriation, the long-range goal of submitting a successful license application to the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission remains central to the Program's mission.  We believe that the program
should include a plan and target date for the  submittal of a license application.  It is apparent
from recent developments, however, that any such plan that depends upon funding levels beyond
reasonable expectations would constitute a de facto decision to abandon the repository initiative
prior to the license application.  
<p>
Prospects for Licensing
<p>
As you may recall, the new Program Approach we adopted in fiscal year 1995 reduced the
projected cost of licensing the Yucca Mountain Project by about one billion dollars.  The
program plan we were pursuing in fiscal year 1995, however, still contemplated the expenditure
of an additional $3.2 billion on Yucca Mountain from fiscal year 1996 through the license
application in 2001.  We are now expecting to spend about $1 billion through fiscal year 1998,
which will contribute to the work needed for an application.
<p>
The implication of these numbers is that, based upon the 1995 program approach, the completion
of a license application would entail an additional $2.5 billion of expenditures after 1998, if the
cost of extending the schedule is considered.  It is clear to me that the Congress will be reluctant
to provide those resources, even if the outlook from the viability assessment is promising.  
<p>
Several years ago Chairman Cantlon noted to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission that the
repository program's premature focus on demonstrating compliance with the details of the
regulations contributed to the program's excessive cost and schedule.  This is one aspect of the
problem.  It should be possible to move directly and efficiently from the viability assessment to a
license application,  if we find that a repository at Yucca Mountain is indeed viable.  The
objective should be to design a repository that is compatible with the geologic setting and to
develop a safety case to support a proposal to construct that repository.  The licensing process
should then focus on examining the safety case to determine if public health and safety and the
environment are adequately protected. 
<p>
I believe that it is both possible and necessary to revisit the regulatory basis that has given rise to
our earlier work plans.  Most of the scientific factors central to those  work plans have,  or will
have, been addressed by 1998.  Testing related to long term performance can be done through the
performance confirmation program during construction and operations prior to closure of the
repository.  Much of the subsequent cost is associated with the documentation and presentation
and defense of the results.  In my view, that cost can be significantly reduced if the focus of the
presentation and the licensing review is on the predictive performance of the repository and on
the safety case made for a specific repository design,  rather than on  a comprehensive discourse
on site characterization.
<p>
In the former case, those factors that are critical to the waste isolation strategy and to the other
vital engineering, safety, and environmental considerations, such as criticality, will be thoroughly
presented and supported.  Those factors that prove to be less relevant can be bounded and put in
perspective with still rigorous but much less elegant trappings for documentation and review.
<p>
If this approach retains the essential requirements of a licensing process that concentrates on the
adequacy of a specific proposed facility, I believe that we can aspire to reestablish a target date
for a license application soon after the year 2000 at a sustainable level of funding.  I believe this
is the only way the program can command the resources needed to retain geologic disposal as a
national strategy.
<p>
We intend to explore this approach and we are considering the revisions to our regulations that
would be needed to clarify our intentions.  We intend to keep the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, the Environmental Protection Agency, our other regulators, the Congress, and
stakeholders, and, of course, the Board advised of our evaluation.
<p>  
Beyond Fiscal Year 1996
<p>
The Administration remains committed to geologic disposal.  The new targets for a repository 
that are practicable will depend upon the policy and regulatory framework within which the
program will operate and upon our expectations for future funding.  In planning this program,
however, given the current environment, I am reluctant to assume that we will receive future
funding levels that are very much greater than the current fiscal year.
<p>
Meanwhile, the Congress is still considering bills that would initiate an immediate start on
interim storage and potentially free the $85 million frozen by the fiscal year 1996 Appropriation
Act.  The House has not yet brought H.R. 1020, a comprehensive authorization bill, to the floor. 
S. 1271, a comparable bill, has been introduced in the Senate and a hearing was held in
December.    
<p>
Testifying at that hearing,  Secretary O'Leary expressed the Administration's opposition to the
Senate measure.  The Administration is concerned that an immediate interim storage initiative, in
the face of probable budgetary constraints, would place the repository program in jeopardy and
reduce the policy commitment to the long term strategy of geologic disposal.   The President has
also expressed his opposition to the peremptory designation of Nevada as a site for an interim
storage facility.  The Secretary proposed that the following principles guide consideration of
legislation:
<p>
     First, we must maintain the momentum which has been attained in the repository
     investigation.  This can be done by funding the program at a level that is adequate to
     resolve the major remaining technical uncertainties to support a viability assessment by
     1998.  Such funding will allow us to make an assessment of the viability of licensing and
     constructing a repository at the Yucca Mountain site.  If Yucca Mountain is a viable site
     for a repository, we would expect to prepare the environmental impact statement, a
     formal recommendation to the President, and license application.
<p>
     Second, we must revise the regulatory structure that guides the licensing of the repository. 
     Such revisions should reflect the experience of the past decade, the policy changes
     already adopted, and the realities of budgetary constraints while maintaining necessary
     health and safety constraints.
<p>
     Third, the selection of a site for interim storage should be based upon objective criteria.  
     The consideration of Nevada as a candidate site, or the determination of the need to
     consider other candidate sites should await the results of the 1998 viability assessment of
     the Yucca Mountain repository.
<p>
     Fourth, the program should be authorized and directed to initiate generic interim storage
     activities using the $85 million already appropriated and reserved for that purpose.  This
     would include requests for proposals to develop the nationwide transportation effort
     needed to transfer spent nuclear fuel from reactors to an interim storage facility, wherever
     it is located.  The generic activities could also include non-site-specific engineering work
     that would assist in beginning the licensing process.
<p>
     And most importantly, we must maintain standards and procedures that will assure that
     the health and safety of the public and workers and the environment will be protected.
<p>
Closing
<p>
Certainly the past year has been an eventful one for this program.  As I have often found to be the
situation, a great deal of policy has already  been made by indirection, without the enactment of a
policy measure by the Congress and a Presidential approval.  The FY 1996 budget cycle and the
debate in the Congress has already set some new constraints on the Program.  The responses we
have already made will shape its future.  
<p>
If we receive even modest future funding, I am confident that the direction we are now taking
will, by 1998, answer the important outstanding technical questions regarding the feasibility of
building the repository.  If there is an aspect of the geologic setting that seriously contradicts our
hypotheses and that will require substantial additional data collection, analyses, and modeling,
we are likely to discover it by 1998.  If there are shortcomings in the available technologies or in
our engineering ability to implement the design concepts they will have become evident.  
<p>
As the results of that work, society's ability to evaluate the feasibility of geologic disposal should
become much less philosophical and much more practical.  It will become very clear how the
geologic disposal option compares to alternatives.  That result is worth the resources needed and
the only responsible course of action.
<p>
 Thank you for your attention, and we look forward to a productive meeting with the Board.
</body></h4></html>
</DOC>