
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B15-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA075-000492-B039-59</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.privacy.org:80/pi/reports/big_bro/dispatches.html 199.34.33.146 19970209041311 text/html 47649
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sun, 09 Feb 1997 04:13:16 GMT
Server: Apache/0.8.14
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 47476
Last-modified: Mon, 15 Apr 1996 05:21:35 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<title>Back on the Torture Trail</title>
<pre>



***********************************************************************

 
Dispatches
 
13th March 1996
 
Back on the Torture Trail
 
 
Commentary          In the autumn of 1994 these men were
                    tortured with electro shock batons in the
                    Lebanon.
 
                    It happened in the Lebanese Ministry of
                    Defence in Beirut.
 
                    The men were stripped naked and made to
                    stand for days with their legs wide apart.
 
                    They have agreed to reenact this horrifying
                    experience for Dispatches but they don't
                    want to be identified.
 
Lebanese Man:       They use the electro-shock sometimes in our
                    eyes. What you feel is terrible, you fell
                    like it's hell, you feel lightning in your
                    eyes and your hands, all your body is
                    shaking, you feel that you want to die, it's
                    better maybe.
 
Q:                  And how long did this go on for ?
 
 
Lebanese Man:       The first four, five days everybody goes
                    through this. We didn't know which
                    instrument they were using in the electric
                    shock and one day when my friend were
                    standing near the wall they came and they
                    tried to shot him in his testicles...
 
Commentary          The electro shock baton has been described
                    as the universal tool of the torturer.
 
Lebanese Man:       And they came like this and they tried to
                    shock him in his testicles and so he saw
                    from underneath the blindfold this stick
                    which give us all this pain.
 
Dawn, RO
Morris/Hall/Trengove
 
 
Commentary          At the very moment the men were being
                    tortured in the Lebanon, Dispatches was
                    negotiating to buy electro-shock weapons
                    from the Royal Ordnance Division of British
                    Aerospace, Britain's leading arms
                    manufacturer. They were being shown to us by
                    middle-man, Gerry Hall.
 
                    Royal Ordnance salesman Philip Morris
                    offered us millions of pounds worth of
                    electro-shock batons and shields while we
                    were posing as businessmen linked to the
                    Lebanese government.
 
                    We discussed the deal at a meeting with
                    Martin Trengove, the head of Royal
                    Ordnance's Middle East Sales.
 
Martin Trengove:    Before we start getting involved in multi
                    million dollar things.....
 
Commentary          The companies we exposed on The Torture
                    Trail subsequently denied what millions of
                    viewers had seen with their own eyes.
 
                    Frank Stott of ICL Technical Plastics,
                    offered to sell us millions of pounds of
                    electro-shock weapons but after Dispatches
                    was shown, his company said it had never
                    sold them to anyone.
 
                    The boss of International Procurement
                    Services, Gerry Hall, helped to put together
                    the British Aerospace deal, but after
                    Dispatches Gerry Hall said he had never sold
                    electro-shock kit in his life.
 
 
BAe / Morris offer
                    BAe offered us over $3.62 million dollars
                    worth of weapons. After Dispatches it
                    denounced what it called our 'subterfuge
                    journalism', and also said that it had
                    "never sold electro-shock weapons"...
 
                    but the fiercest reaction came, however from
                    Michael Heseltine's DTI. The then President
                    of the Board of Trade, accused us of
                    'scaremongering', of 'contrived allegations'
                    and of 'making a story that otherwise did
                    not exist'.
 
Commentary          The government rejected Amnesty
                    International's demand for an enquiry into
                    what it described as 'grave and serious
                    charges' [made by Dispatches] and
                    Heseltine's ministers leapt to the defence
                    of the companies we exposed.
 
Lord Dubs:          May I ask the Minister to look again at this
                    whole issue with particular reference to
                    electric shock batons ?
 
Earl Ferrers:       My Lords, I really do think the noble Lord,
                    Lord Dubs I must say to him that he should
                    not take every single television programme
                    at it's face value. There are certain people
                    who are prepared to make programmes and who
                    are prepared to entrap people in to saying
                    things and then to put those on as
                    programmes in which they purport to show
                    that people are behaving, in an untoward
                    way. I have explained that the result of
                    that particular programme involves 3
                    particular firms and those firms have
                    acquitted themselves reasonably.
 
Pierre Sane:        If that behaviour is reasonable then we
                    certainly have a different understanding of
                    what reasonable behaviour is. Reasonable
                    behaviour cannot be a behaviour that leads
                    to undermining the system of international
                    protection of human rights. Reasonable
                    behaviour cannot be a behaviour where using
                    the loophole that exists in the legislation,
                    a company will make benefits as a result of
                    trading in weapons that are misused by
                    security forces to torture people. This is
                    money which is earned on the blood of
                    victims.
 
Commentary          The public outcry that followed 'The Torture
                    Trail' was a mixture if shock and disbelief
                    that the government could possibly allow
                    this to happen.... but our sources told us
                    that it was still very much 'business as
                    usual' in the British torture trade.
 
Robin Ballantyne:   You've got companies now setting themselves
                    up as what is known as "One-Stop Shops".
                    They may not make all the products, they may
                    not necessarily have them all in stock, but
                    they will arrange to have them shipped from
                    all the different, all four corners of the
                    planet to wherever they need to go.  But the
                    important thing is to follow the money. If
                    the money comes back to Great Britain, then
                    Britain needs to take some of that
                    responsibility.
 
 
Switzerland
 
Commentary          We set up a 'Dispatches' front company in
                    Switzerland, in Basle on the Rhein, where
                    France, Germany and Switzerland meet. Our
                    company was called Eric Lopez Associates and
                    we contacted 8 British 'internal security'
                    companies saying we wanted to buy a package
                    of riot control equipment, that included 300
                    electro-shock batons- initially only two
                    companies refused.
 
 
Martyn Gregory      None of the British companies that quoted
                    for electro-shock equipment bothered to
                    check out the credentials of Eric Lopez
                    Associates. Had the done so, they would of
                    course found out Eric Lopez does not exist.
                    They might also have found out that their
                    quotations were being received on a public
                    fax machine here at a train station in
                    Switzerland. And they were being read not by
                    Eric Lopez, but by Dispatches.
 
 
Commentary          Some of the companies warned us that it was
                    illegal to sell electro-shock batons in
                    Britain, but their faxes reassured us that
                    the weapons would never have to touch
                    British soil. The companies' enthusiasm to
                    deal with us was clear in their sales patter
                    on the phone.
 
                    TELEPHONE ACTUALITY
 
Simon Telling, CCS: Its obviously illegal for us to sell from
                    the UK so uhm in theory what we would do is,
                    we would either send everything from New
                    York to Switzerland or the destination that
                    you requires it's entirely up to you.
 
 
Bill Buttermer:     No problem we can quote for the sticks no
                    problem.
                    It's an electronic, it gives him a huge
                    electrical shock low low current, high
                    voltage.
 
Q:                  Non lethal though
 
A:                  I mean that's the whole object otherwise you
                    just shoot the guy. This is basically to
                    make him behave himself.
 
Bauer, CDS:         These are really good quality, electronical,
                    and a proper rocker switch in the handle. I
                    mean there's what's known as a hot coil, it
                    isn't a cheap piece of shit. You can
                    actually use these to hit people with they
                    don't fall apart like some of this stuff
                    they are decent quality.
 
 
Commentary          Companies were not put off when we said our
                    client was the Zairean government which has
                    an established reputation for torture.
                    President Mobuto's police favour electro-
                    shock batons for torture because they don't
                    leave marks and their victims don't have
                    scars to show Amnesty International if they
                    survive. Roberto a refugee in Zaire who was
                    tortured.
 
Roberto:            This time they touched me again with the
                    electronic baton but in the nape of the neck
                    and at the base of the groin (genital area)
                    and it hurt so much that even now when I
                    speak it is difficult to keep my head still
                    as the back of my neck hurts very much.
 
Commentary          The first company we approached to buy
                    electro-shock batons for Zaire was SDMS
                    Security Products Ltd. It operates from tiny
                    premises on a single floor immediately above
                    the tanning shop in the Fulham Road in
                    London.
 
                    SDMS is a member of the Defence
                    Manufacturers Association and one of its
                    Directors has an OBE.
 
                    A source in the Ministry of Defence alerted
                    us to the company's brochure which
                    advertises electro-shock weapons.
 
Intercontinental
Hotel
Commentary          We invited SDMS's chairman, David Knights to
                    meet us in the Intercontinental Hotel in
                    London. We said we here on a brief visit
                    from Switzerland. We secretly filmed our
                    meeting with Knights. He was confident he
                    could provide us with electro-shock
                    weapons...
 
 
David Knights:      We'll provide you with a sample in complete
                    confidence.
                    What would happen is... We would prefer to
                    ship them direct to your client, if that is
                    possible, particularly if it is coming from
                    South Africa and the client is Zaire that
                    will save time obviously. And erm, we cab
                    get it done through England, but we don't
                    want to do it technically the goods are
                    illegal here.. 
 
 
Commentary          300 Shock batons were included in the riot
                    gear package Knights offered to sell us.
 
                    He also sent us details of previous 
                    electro-shock sales made by SDMS and its
                    associates in South Africa. They claimed to
                    have sold them around the world to countries
                    including Libya, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and
                    Angola in Africa. And Mexico, Peru, Burma
                    and Indonesia. All of which are known to be
                    torturing states.
 
                    After Mr Knights turned down a request for
                    a formal interview we decided to confront
                    him.
 
Doorstep
Martyn Gregory:     Good Morning is Mr Knights here?
 
Female:             Yes he is.
 
Martyn Gregory:     Ah, Mr Knights good morning.
 
Mr Knights:         Good morning.
 
Martyn Gregory:     Martyn Gregory from Channel 4 Dispatches.
                    I'd like to ask you.
 
Mr Knights:         No
 
Martyn Gregory:     I'd like ti ask you why you sell electro-
                    shock batons.
 
Commentary          Mr Knights appeared reluctant to answer our
                    questions.
 
Mr Knights:         No, Get out.
 
Martyn Gregory:     Sorry ?
 
Mr Knights:         Out.
 
Martyn Gregory:     Don't assault my cameraman, I don't think it
                    will do you very much good at all.
 
Mr Knights:         Do you mind getting out of here?
 
Martyn Gregory:     Well I do actually because I want to ask you
                    some questions.
 
Commentary          This was to prove difficult as my camera
                    team and I soon found ourselves on opposite
                    sides of a firmly closed door.
 
                    I rejoined the crew 5 minutes later.
 
                    Knights now claims he doesn't deal in
                    electro-shock batons - just like the
                    businessmen we exposed a year ago.
 
                    Paddington Green police seized Gerry Hall's
                    electro-shock riot shield last year. He had
                    lied to us when he said he had permission
                    from the Home Office. None of the companies
                    we exposed then, including BAe, had the
                    necessary permission to hold or to sell
                    electro-shock weapons.
 
                    The police spoke ti us as potential
                    witnesses to the offence we had filmed, but
                    no prosecutions followed.
 
                    A serious rumpus ensued however as the BAe
                    salesman, lead the torture trail to a secret
                    at the heart of the biggest defence deal in
                    Britains history - the 20 billion
                    (Sterling) Al Yamamah deal between Britain
                    and Saudi Arabia. Philip Morris claimed it
                    included 8,000 electro-shock batons.
 
Morris at Star
Street
 
Philip Morris:      I've told you too much already by telling
                    you that we sold to the Saudi's... in any
                    numbers but if it's er... British Aerospace
                    have er you know the Al Yamamah programme
 
Martyn Gregory:     I do.
 
Philip Morris:      Have you heard about it, it just gets
                    swallowed up in things like that.
 
 
John Clarkson:      It just gets swallowed up.
 
Philip Morris:      That's right.
 
Commentary          Michael Heseltine signed the Al Yamamah deal
                    with the Saudi government when he was
                    Secretary of State for Defence.  It is
                    Britain's biggest ever arms deal and its
                    precise terms are a State secret.  British
                    Aerospace is the main contractor on behalf
                    of the British government. The government
                    and the company firmly denied Morris's
                    claims that electro-shock weapons were sold
                    to the Saudis. Morris was suspended by BAe
                    in the row that followed 'Dispatches'
                    revelations, pending, BAe said, disciplinary
                    procedures against him and Trengove. BAe has
                    never revealed what action was taken.
 
 
Anne Gibson:        Dear Mr Butler after watching Channel 4's
                    Dispatches earlier this week I felt I had to
                    register my complete disgust how Britain
                    could endorse such goings on without turning
                    a hair.
 
Commentary          Ann Gibson was one of many Channel 4 viewers
                    who were shocked by Dispatches revelations
                    about the claims that torture weapons were
                    'swallowed up' in the Al Yamamah deal.
 
Anne Gibson:        I've never written to an MP before, so I was
                    quite amazed how the letters started
                    snowballing quite a few letters.
 
 
Commentary          The reply from her own MP, Peter Butler, was
                    remarkably frank; Dispatches, he wrote, had
                    told 'lies' and the film had been
                    'manufactured to serve the career interests
                    of the programme makers'. Butler had been
                    briefed by the DTI.
 
Anne Gibson:        When I got the reply I wasn't satisfied at
                    all, all they did was deny that anything
                    untoward had happened which seemed very
                    strange as we could see it happening on the
                    video film.
 
Commentary          Geoffrey Bindman, is one of Britain's
                    leading libel and human rights lawyers. He
                    successfully defended Clive Ponting the
                    civil servant who had been accused of
                    leaking secrets about the Falklands War. I
                    asked Bindman to study Heseltine's letters.
 
Bindman:            I would be hard put to it to find any
                    comparable example of cynical manipulation
                    and dishonesty on the part of government as
                    this one.
 
Commentary          Michael Hesletine won praise from Sir
                    Richard Scott into his arms to Iraq enquiry
                    because of his objections to signing Public
                    Interest Immunity Certificates that were
                    placed before him in the Matrix Churchill
                    case.
 
                    Yet in this instance Heseltine had signed
                    ill thought out letters about 'The Torture
                    Trail' that had originally been drafted by
                    a civil servant who gave no indication as to
                    whether he had actually watched the
                    programme. I started libel proceedings
                    against the government.
 
Bindman:            It was an attempt to rubbish the programme
                    and presumably from a government's point
                    view they were trying to use this as a means
                    of avoiding an investigation into the
                    allegations made in the programme.
 
Commentary          Rather than investigating our allegations
                    the authorities began to investigate us -
                    the programme makers. Shortly after I
                    started my legal action against the
                    government, the Ministry of Defence took
                    over the police investigation into the
                    offence that we had filmed. The Ministry of
                    Defence Police decided that it was me as
                    well as the businessmen Dispatches had
                    exposed who might have committed crimes.
                    They questioned me as a suspect rather than
                    as a witness.
 
Martyn Gregory:     I was interviewed by the Ministry of Defence
                    Police under caution in the presence of my
                    Solicitor.
 
                    They told me that because of my role as the
                    reporter on the Torture Trail I was being
                    interviewed as a suspect. They told me that
                    I could face the criminal charges of
                    handling electro-shock batons and also of
                    inciting BAe officials to break the firearms
                    act. If charged I could face a prison
                    sentence of up to 5 years.  We asked Michael
                    Portillo the Defence Secretary to be
                    interviewed on this programme to justify the
                    investigation and also the use of taxpayers
                    money on it. He replied that he couldn't
                    take part because it is an ongoing
                    investigation.
 
High Court
Commentary          Surprisingly the government did not even
                    submit a defence to my libel action, and
                    agreed to apologize in the High Court for
                    the letters signed by Michael Heseltine and
                    his ministers.
 
BBC 1 O'Clock News  The department of Trade and Industry has
                    agreed to pay 55,000 pounds (Sterling) in
                    libel damages in costs to a journalist after
                    it had accused him of making up evidence
                    about the sale of torture instruments by
                    British firms, The DTI accepted that the
                    allegations about the producer of the
                    Channel 4 documentary Dispatches were
                    untrue.
 
Commentary          The government conceded defeat as soon as
                    MPs returned to their constituencies for the
                    summer.
 
                    The Labour Party called for Michael
                    Heseltine and his ministers to personally
                    pay the total costs of the court case,
                    85,000 (Sterling), but the Prime Minister
                    insisted that the taxpayer would foot the
                    bill.
 
                    In its statement in the High Court, the
                    government apologised unreservedly for
                    accusing me of making up our expose of the
                    British Torture trade. It said that the
                    programme had been 'properly researched'.
 
                    but the government insisted however, that no
                    export regulations had been broken....
 
                    A week after it's libel defeat, however, the
                    government made an even more significant
                    admission....
 
                    Ian Taylor, one of the DTI ministers who
                    signed some of the libellous letters,
                    admitted that electronic batons had been
                    given a license in 1993 for shipment via the
                    UK.
 
                    This answer confirmed that, as well as
                    libelling me, Michael Heseltine's DTI had
                    been lying when it said that the trade in
                    electro-shock batons did not exist. The
                    trade does exist and the government knows it
                    exists.
 
Ann Clwyd:          In the months since the programme they have
                    given the impression that their hands are
                    clean that the export of electro-shock
                    batons was something very far away from them
                    and now suddenly they produce that answer.
 
Commentary          Ann Clwyd was the MP who extracted Ian
                    Taylor's admission. She has moved 4 Early
                    Day motions, signed  by hundreds of MPs, and
                    asked over 70 questions on issues raised by
                    The Torture Trail.
 
Ann Clwyd:          This is an interesting one asking the
                    President of the Board of Trade to list the
                    companies to which export licenses were
                    granted for the export of electronic batons
                    in the last 5 years.
 
Q:                  And what answer did they give you?
 
Ann Clwyd:          The first part of this question says it
                    could only be answered at disproportionate
                    cost.
 
Q:                  And that basically means that they're not
                    going to answer it does it?
 
Ann Clwyd:          That's right, they don't want to answer it.
 
Ann Clwyd:          I think there's an enormous cover up going
                    on and the government is deliberately
                    dragging it's feet. That's the conclusion
                    I've come to after a year of asking
                    questions.
 
Robert Jarman:      I think it was a naked political cover up.
                    I don't think that government wanted anybody
                    to get er, too close into the whole Al
                    Yamamah programme. I mean, it is of such
                    importance to the government that anybody
                    who criticises it or, indeed criticises er,
                    Saudi senior official dealings are - are
                    going to be stamped on fairly hard.
 
                    "... I think the programme in my opinion was
                    100% and that subsequent events have only
                    lent credibility to that view."
 
Commentary          'Subsequent events' appear to have left
                    Britain's arms dealers unchastened. This is
                    another British businessman prepared to
                    export electro-shock weapons to Zaire
                    despite Britain's official policy of
                    upholding human rights.
 
Bill Buttermer:     This sort of thing is really difficult to
                    get an export licence for.
 
Q:                  Why?
 
A:                  Human Rights, the way they look at is there
                    is a Zairean policeman wandering round the
                    streets giving all his fellow countryman an
                    english electro-shock and that is really bad
                    news.
 
Commentary          But we were about to find out how he quite
                    legally can sell electro-shock batons like
                    this to Zaire without any interference from
                    the British government.
 
 
Part 2
Mexico
Commentary          The Torture Trail has led us to the largest
                    city in the world. We've come to Mexico to
                    visit a factory which makes electro-shock
                    weapons described by human rights groups as
                    the universal tool of the torturer.
 
                    Dispatches journalist, Christopher Martin,
                    and myself are posing as British
                    businessmen. Our introduction to the Mexican
                    manufacturer came from a British company
                    based in Wiltshire. They also sent us
                    leaflets describing the batons we were about
                    to see.
 
Chat in Taxi
 
"Philip Anderson"   They are claiming to sell 5 of these batons
                    ranging from the 18 inch to the 36 inches.
 
"Jim Corkhill"      36 inches well that's 3 foot long.
 
"Philip Anderson"   And one of them has a spiral that runs down
                    the outside.
 
"Jim Corkhill"      But what voltage is this ?
 
"Philip Anderson"   They say that they are all 50,000 volts
                    which they claim to be safe humane.
 
Commentary          The Macoisa company in Mexico City operates
                    from behind a wrought iron grill and two
                    bomb proof doors.  Inside, they are very
                    keen to show us their range of electro-shock
                    weapons - its legal to make and sell them
                    here.
 
                    Each of these batons emits a charge of
                    40,000 volts... The shield has the same
                    voltage - the Americans classify this as a
                    torture shield.
 
                    Macoisa's boss, Alfredo Aguilla, is
                    confidant that he can export the batons on
                    behalf of his British client to anywhere we
                    chose....
 
Aguilla:            For Mexico government no problem, maybe in
                    your country you need a licence to import
                    but for an export license from Mexico we
                    don't have any trouble.
 
"Philip Anderson"   Even if it's a problem government no
                    problem?
 
"Jim Corkhill"      Bad human rights no problem?
 
Aguilla:            No, no problem.
 
"Jim Corkhill"      Well that's good because the Zairean's are
                    not well known for their human rights are
                    they?
 
Aguilla:            I think you don't have any trouble in that
                    respect.
 
"Philip Anderson"   Well the problem is the Zairean govt is not
                    so nice do you understand?
 
Aguilla:            Yes I understand.
 
Commentary          We were invited to test the 'universal tool
                    of the torturer ourselves'.
 
"Philip Anderson"   I heard you know in some places they use
                    them for interrogation.
 
Aguilla:            Sometime
 
"Philip Anderson"   And then it's dangerous ?
 
Aguilla:            Especially when you put here
 
"Philip Anderson"   Really and then what happens ?
 
Aguilla:            Real damage
 
"Philip Anderson"   So it's like torture like torture then ?
 
Aguilla:            Oh Yes.
 
Commentary          Aguilla is a former major in the Mexican
                    Army. He was proud to show us round his
                    electro-shock weapon factory.
 
                    Britain classifies these batons and shields
                    as weapons: Their possession or sale in the
                    UK carries a jail sentence of up to five
                    years, the same penalty as possession of an
                    AK 47 machine gun.
 
                    Aguilla was happy for us to film and chat to
                    the workers who appeared well aware of the
                    dangers of the products they were making....
 
                    We showed one of the Mexican shock batons to
                    Roberto. He was appalled that a British
                    company could be involved - the batons were
                    almost identical to the ones used to torture
                    him in Zaire.....
 
Roberto:            My reaction on discovering this this type of
                    weapon is I don't know (pause). I could
                    really call it something really horrible,
                    immoral because those people who make it for
                    torture they don't don't test it one their
                    own bodies and they don't know the pain it
                    causes. They do it to make other people
                    suffer quite simply to gain money. Its very
                    tragic.
 
Commentary          The British company that had set up our
                    contact in Mexico was Compass Safety
                    International, formerly known as Compass
                    Maritime. It is better known for selling
                    marine life - saving equipment like
                    navigational aids and life jackets.
 
                    but in London Compass Safety International
                    Managing Director, Bill Buttermer made it
                    clear that he could use Mexico to avoid
                    British export controls.....
 
Bill Buttermer:     You're not going to need an export license
                    as they're coming straight out of Mexico.
 
"Philip Anderson"   And is Zaire going to present a problem at
                    all with this ?
 
Bill Buttermer:     Mexico is no problem. You said West Africa
                    and I thought it would be Nigeria.
 
"Philip Anderson"   That might have presented a problem ?
 
Bill Buttermer:     It could have done but it wasn't even going
                    to present a problem with Nigeria.
 
"Philip Anderson"   Because you could have done it from Mexico?
 
Bill Buttermer:     Yeah absolutely.
 
"Philip Anderson"   So basically you can do anything from there
                    you can circumvent every
 
Bill Buttermer:     Sure, If you can get the kit.
 
Commentary          Compass Safety International offered to sell
                    us 300 electro-shock batons at $25,000 (US),
                    and it said the riot gear we requested would
                    come from a Scottish company, ICL Technical
                    Plastics, in Glasgow. Buttermer told us that
                    our contact there would be none other than
                    Frank Stott, an old friend of the Torture
                    Trail.
 
                    Stott is currently under investigation by
                    the Strathclyde police after showing us a
                    terrifying range of electro-shock kit on
                    'Dispatches' last year.
 
                    He had boasted of British government
                    support...
 
Frank Stott:        The government are very keen that we get
                    involved in the export business of this kind
                    of thing.
 
Commentary          ... like Bill Buttermer of Compass Safety,
                    he didn't really want to know who he was
                    selling these weapons to ...
 
Frank Stott:        With this sort of kit to be honest I tend
                    not to ask too many question. What they're
                    doing, where it's going.
 
Frank Davies:       I suppose it's just business really ?
 
Frank Stott:        They're all grown men they know what they're
                    doing.... although I sometimes wonder about
                    that.
 
COPEX 94
 
Commentary          We had first met Stott and some of his
                    'grown men' at the COPEX exhibition. The
                    Covert Operational and Procurement
                    Exhibition is reputedly Britain's most
                    tightly guarded internal security fair held.
                    It's held at Sandown Park race course every
                    year.
 
                    In 1994 we filmed secretly for the first
                    time. There were no torture weapons on
                    display because they are illegal, but we
                    exposed it as a good place for starting
                    deals in weapons that can be used for
                    torture.
 
                    We encountered Stott who briefed us on his
                    electro-shock weapons and later offered to
                    sell us nearly 2 million (sterling) worth.
 
                    In the bar we continued our negotiations
                    with the Royal Ordnance Division of British
                    Aerospace and Gerry Hall for an electro-
                    shock deal worth 3 and a half million
                    dollars.
 
                    Copex 95 was greeted by demonstrations and
                    protests for the first time in its history.
 
                    After The Torture Trail's exposure of COPEX
                    1994, widespread protests in Germany had led
                    to the cancellation of COPEX Bonn last
                    summer.
                    At Sandown Park, demonstrators layed seige
                    to COPEX 95.
 
CAAT Organiser:     Can you just join the blockade just come
                    through. Sit down.
 
Jen Parker:         "I really just do not understand how they
                    can claim it is not an arms fair and that
                    they are not involved in promoting the arms
                    trade because they are"
 
Commentary          Some of the demonstrators had been sued by
                    COPEX after writing to Sandown Park pleading
                    with it to refuse to host the exhibition.
                    One of those sued was 78 year old Quaker,
                    Alan Staley.
 
Alan Staley:        I'd like to go in because I want to have a
                    word with Commander Julian Winkley who is
                    boss of this outfit because he has issued a
                    writ against me and I would like to discuss
                    it with him, to find out why he has done
                    it... and I think this is an issue we could
                    discuss man to man.
 
Policeman:          I think that's an issues for you and him all
                    I know is that you're not allowed past these
                    gates at the moment.
 
COPEX demo
Commentary          COPEX boss 'Commander' Julian Winkley turns
                    out ti be a former drama teacher. At COPEX
                    95 he became photographer Julian Winkley. He
                    busied himself taking snaps of demonstrators
                    being turfed out of Sandown Park. He claims
                    COPEX is open to the public but this is not
                    true ?
 
Commentary          Even Ann Clwyd MP couldn't get in.
 
Ann Clwyd:          All I want is permission to come round the
                    fair.
 
Guard:              He hasn't granted you that.
 
Ann Clywd:          So I as a member of Parliament can no come
                    in? 
 
Guard:              That's what he said and I can only reiterate
                    what he said to me.
 
Ann Clwyd:          Thank you very much.
 
Commentary          Dispatches was refused entry to COPEX 95 but
                    this man was inside. He changes his
                    appearance frequently to gain entry.
 
Robin Ballantyne:   You have to become part of the business so
                    I'll shave I'll have a suit you have to look
                    the part. I talk to people at their stalls,
                    uhm, I sit in bars and listen to people
                    basically just gathering intelligence on the
                    trade and what's being made.
 
Q:                  Can you understand why COPEX keep the Press,
                    demonstrators and members of Parliament out?
 
A:                  Absolutely, if they've got people coming
                    from torturing states they don't certainly
                    don't want to be seen and have their
                    photographs put across the world's press.
 
Q:                  Who did you see in there ?
 
A:                  There was quite a large delegation from
                    Indonesia at least 7 or 8 people and they
                    were being shown round by a British
                    gentleman because they actually had
                    Indonesia written on their badges.
 
Commentary          The indonesians at COPEX were in fact from
                    the crack military unit Kopassus.  Its
                    soldiers were involved in this notorious
                    massacre. These pictures alerted the world
                    to the Indonesian army's atrocities in East
                    Timor.
 
                    Kopassus was present in the cemetery on that
                    day. The Indonesian Embassy confirmed that
                    Kopassus representatives were flown in from
                    Jakarta specifically to attend COPEX 95.
 
Pierre Sane:        KOPASSUS has a lot of blood on its hands.
                    The Indonesian Army units and KOPASSUS have
                    been involved in not just extra judicial
                    executions, but also er torture,
                    disappearances, arbitrary detention,
                    incommunicado er, detention.
 
Commentary          We had spotted an Iranian delegation at
                    COPEX 94 as they inspected state of the art
                    covert surveillance equipment.
                    Unsurprisingly the government attempted to
                    distance itself from COPEX when challenged
                    in parliament as Britain has a complete ban
                    on military sales to Iran...
 
Mullin:             What on earth are we doing to allowing an
                    delegation from Iran to attend arms fairs
                    here ? He might also have found equipment on
                    sale or available in that exhibition capable
                    of use in torture. Does the Minister think
                    that sponsoring events of that kind
                    represent the best use of British tax payers
                    money ?
 
Freeman:            This is a private exhibition as I understand
                    it there is no tax payers money involved.
 
Commentary          This Defence Minister was being less than
                    accurate. This written answer from trade
                    minister, Philip Oppenheimer, shows that the
                    government has spent over 81,000 (sterling)
                    of taxpayers money on travel grants to help
                    British companies attend the 6 COPEX
                    exhibitions abroad.
 
                    Dispatches discovered further compelling
                    evidence that DTI advice on electro-shock
                    sales was being distributed while Michael
                    Heseltine and his ministers were assuring
                    everyone that the trade did not exist.
 
                    This report three quarter of which was
                    funded by the DTI contains advice to British
                    companies on where to sell electro-shock
                    weapons in the Gulf where torture is
                    widespread.
                    The section on the oil rich micro-state of
                    Qatar where floggings are commonplace and
                    beheading occurs, contains the following
                    advice:
 
                    "Qatar ... key market point ... Special
                    Forces (requirements include) electronic
                    batons".
 
Grosvenot GVs
Commentary          Compass Safety's Bill Buttermer also claimed
                    the government had helped him get around
                    parliament's restrictions on the sale of
                    internal security to Indonesia before he
                    joined the company.....
 
Bill Buttermer:     We had something called a fragmentation
                    grenade which was basically anti-personnel,
                    and it shoots a crowd of ball bearings out
                    of a discharger on a vehicle so it's great
                    for anti ambush and that sort of thing, but
                    we couldn't get an export license for that
                    but we said hang on you know we've just sold
                    them tanks with high explosives but they
                    said that's for defence but this is for
                    internal security.
 
Q:                  So they never got them in the end ?
 
A:                  Shortly after that someone in the Ministry
                    of Defence said well why don't you call them
                    anti ambush grenades?  Change the name so we
                    thought that's a good idea so we put it
                    another way anti ambush grenades and got it
                    just like that.
 
                    COMPASS STATEMENT
 
Commentary          When Dispatches confronted Compass with the
                    evidence of its electro-shock offers, the
                    chairman, Don May immediately withdrew the
                    offer. He said he 'abominates the deliberate
                    infliction of pain on a helpless person',
                    and announced that Mr Buttermer had
                    resigned.
 
Roberto in cell     It was the former managing director of
                    Compass Safety who had shown us the most
                    profitable route on the Torture Trail - off
                    shore production. The profits come back to
                    Britain and no-one raises awkward questions
                    about human rights ....
 
Pierre Sane:        It is not just good enough to prohibit the
                    manufacturing of this equipment in the UK or
                    the sale or possession of this equipment in
                    the UK. Legislation should also prohibit
                    companies from engaging in offshore sale of
                    this equipment. Why is it prohibited in the
                    UK in terms of use. Its because this
                    equipment can be misused to cause extreme
                    pain and suffering and even to cause death.
 
Martyn Gregory      We started off on the TORTURE TRAIL nearly
                    2 years ago to investigate a trade that the
                    British Government claims does not exist but
                    we found a string of British companies
                    prepared to sell these weapons and some
                    evidence of active support from the British
                    Government.  By using countries like Mexico
                    to make electro-shock batons, the companies
                    can do their deals and the British
                    Government can claim that no export
                    regulations have been broken. They haven't
                    it's all perfectly legal and very
                    profitable. Britain will retain it's status
                    as a key provider of weapons to torturing
                    states around the world unless and until the
                    British Government puts a stop to this
                    morally indefensible state of affairs.
 
                    THE END
 
 
(37 credits over COPEX candles)
 
</pre>

</DOC>