
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B18-285</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B026-202</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/weld.html 206.61.184.43 19970122061122 text/html 8078
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:11:13 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:05:32 GMT
Content-length: 7863
</DOCHDR>
<html><pre>THE BOSTON GLOBE * SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 25, 1995 * PAGE 
13 
 
Pot, a balm to some, faces a new hurdle 
 
By Dolores Kong 
GLOBE STAFF 
 
   The treatment for the cancer spreading throughout David 
Getchell's body causes nausea and vomiting so severe that the 51-
year-old scientist can barely eat.  Only one drug helps: 
marijuana. 
   "It makes life more bearable, and you can hang on and fight," 
said Getchell, who worked as a pediatric chemist at Massachusetts 
General Hospital before he became too sick.  "That's why I'm 
still alive." 
   But a bill to allow patients like Getchell to use medical 
necessity as a legal defense if they are arrested for possessing 
marijuana, passed early this month by the Legislature, has met 
unexpected resistance from Gov. Weld. 
   Weld has sent the bill back to the Legislature, requesting an 
amendment that would allow the legal defense only for certified 
participants in a Department of Public Health therapeutic 
research program - of which there are none. 
   The program, created by a 1991 law, has never enrolled anyone 
because the federal government has stopped providing a legal 
supply of medical marijuana, although the state has renewed 
efforts to get federal approval for supplying marijuana to 
patients. 
   Weld said in an interview that "unlike others, I do think that 
there's some evidence that marijuana has some value for treating 
some medical conditions," such as glaucoma, AIDS wasting 
syndrome, or the side effects of chemotherapy. 
   "I just think the bill is just too wide open.  The self-
diagnosis approach is too wide open," he said. 
   Getchell, a fair-skinned redhead diagnosed in 1990 with 
melanoma, an aggressive skin cancer that resulted from severe 
sunburn when he was an adolescent, fought hard to get the bill 
passed.  He said he cannot understand Weld's action, pointing out 
that in 1992, the governor commuted the sentence of Joseph 
Hutchins, who was growing and using marijuana so that he could 
eat despite scleroderma, an incurable disease that hardened his 
esophagus and made it extremely hard to swallow. 
   "What I would want to say to Gov. Weld is that this is an 
issue of compassion," Getchell said.  "It's not about winning or 
not winning the drug war.  It's about sick and dying people and a 
way to help them under medical supervision." 
   Rep. Patricia D. Jehlen (D-Somerville), the bill's sponsor and 
Getchell's state representative, said she did not understand 
Weld's action either, since legislators have all along 
incorporated suggestions on the wording from the governor's 
office.  "All I know is that it doesn't make sense, given what he 
did with Hutchins," Jehlen said. 
   Hutchins has appealed his conviction, but the Supreme Judicial 
Court ruled in 1991 that he could not use a medical-necessity 
defense.  The Legislature pased the current bill to recognize 
such a defense in Massachusetts, giving patients like Getchell 
the ability to bring up medical evidence in court, Jehlen said.  
She has filed an amendment that she believes would deal with 
Weld's concerns, but with this year's legislative session over, 
the bill will have to wait until January. 
   Hutchins now lives in Washington state, which recognizes the 
medical-necessity defense, according to Jon Holmes, a volunteer 
serving on the drug policy task force of the Civil Liberties 
Union of Massachusetts. 
   Weld said his thinking has not changed since he commuted 
Hutchins' sentence, but that the bill as passed does not have 
safeguards in place to ensure that only those with legitimate 
medical claims like Hutchins can use the medical-necessity 
defense. 
   "The bill I originally sent back didn't have the word 'doctor' 
anywhere near it," Weld said.  That suggests anyone arrested for 
marijuana possession would assert medical necessity "in virtually 
every case," he said. 
   Opponents of the medical use of marijuana have argued that 
there are legal alternatives to treat pain, nausea and other 
medical symptoms, and that legalizing just one use of the drug 
would open the door to marijuana becoming legal overall.  In the 
early 1990s, the Bush administration stopped taking new 
applications for a US-run medical marijuana program; only eight 
persons getting the drug legally through the program are still 
alive.  The Clinton administration has been unwilling to reopen 
the program. 
   Rep. Barney Frank (D-Mass.), who earlier this month filed a 
bill in Congress to permit doctors once again to prescribe 
marijuana to patients with certain diseases, said that the 
political climate in this country appears to be getting in the 
way of compassionate use of the drug. 
   "We are allowing the political impulses to apprea 'tough on 
drugs' to interfere with alleviating pain and suffering," said 
Frank, who noted that House Speaker Newt Gingrich had been a 
cosponsor to a 1982 bill that would also have allowed doctors to 
prescribe marijuana. 
   Dr. Lester Grinspoon - a Harvard psychiatrist whose book, 
"Marijuana: The Forbidden Medicine," is available in seven 
languages - said he believes Weld's amendment dooms the medical 
use of marijuana in this state.  "It's a cowardly way of vetoing, 
in my view," Grinspoon said, adding that he does not expect the 
state public health program ever to get federal approval for a 
supply. 
   David Mulligan, the state public health commissioner, 
disagreed, saying he is hopeful that within the next year the 
program can get approval to get a supply from the federal 
government or to grow its own marijuana under strict security.  
The state does not want to jeopardize negotiations by appearing 
to condone illegal use of marijuana in the meantime, Mulligan 
said. 
   The stat also does not want to use marijuana seized in drug 
raids for medical purposes, he added, since it might have 
impurities that could be harmful to those with suppressed immune 
systems. 
   Aside from tying the medical necessity defense to participants 
in the state public health program, Weld's amendment expands the 
medical conditions that make patients eligible for the program by 
adding AIDS and spasticity associated with multiple sclerosis, 
Mulligan said. 
   Even if the state program were approved, it might not help 
Rhonda Lemoine, 39, who says she has been using marijuana to 
treat the chronic pain from muscle spasms and degenerative 
arthritis of the spine since a car accident in 1991.  Her 
condition is not one of the eligible medical conditions currently 
listed by the program. 
   "I couldn't work for a long time" with the pain and the loss 
of appetite, said Lemoine, the medical marijuana coordinator for 
the Massachusetts Cannabis Reform Coalition, which supports 
Jehlin's bill.  "I use marijuana as an appetite enhancer, and it 
helps with the muscle spasms.  I've gone from basically being 
bedridden to being functioning." 
   Lemoine, he husband and her son were arrested last year in an 
early morning raid at their central Massachusetts home, after an 
acquaintance who was arrested on crack cocaine charges turned 
them in as part of a plea bargain.  Lemoine was willing to plead 
guilty to a charge of possessing an ounce of marijuana, but she 
had to plead guilty to distribution as well to get charges 
against her husband dropped, Lemoine said.  Her husband paid a 
fine, her son got six months' probation and she got a suspended 
one-year sentence, with probation until February 1996. 
   "I want to stay healthy and do whatever I can," said Lemoine, 
who has been able to open her own business after beginning to use 
marijuana.  "It's the only law I'm breaking, and I'm trying to 
change that one."</pre></html>
</DOC>