
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B15-182</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA018-000197-B017-1</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.rw.doe.gov:80/pages/resource/fedreg/180c.htm 204.4.196.7 19970106214253 text/html 84615
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Mon, 06 Jan 1997 21:41:34 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Mon, 03 Jun 1996 19:31:17 GMT
Content-length: 84440
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<h2>
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY</h2>

<h3>Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management
<p>
Safe Transportation and Emergency Response Training; Technical 
Assistance and Funding</h3><hr>

<strong>AGENCY: </strong> Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management, Department of Energy
<p>
<strong>ACTION:  </strong>Notice of Proposed Policy and Procedures
<p>
<strong>SUMMARY:</strong> The Department of Energy (the Department) publishes for public comment a proposed
policy statement setting forth its plans for implementing a program of technical and financial assistance to
states for training public safety officials of appropriate units of local government and to Indian tribes
through whose jurisdiction the Department plans to transport spent nuclear fuel or high-level radioactive
waste.  The training would cover both safe routine transportation procedures and emergency response
procedures. 
<p>
<strong>DATES:</strong> Written comments should be sent to the Department and must be received on or before 
August 15, 1996.
<p>
<strong>ADDRESSES:</strong> Written comments should be directed to: Corinne Macaluso, U.S. Department of Energy,
c/o Lois Smith, TRW Environmental Safety Systems, Inc., 600 Maryland Avenue, S.W., Suite 695,
Washington, D.C. 20024, ATTN.: Section 180(c) Comments.
<p>
Persons submitting comments should include their names and addresses.  Receipt of comments in response
to this Notice will be acknowledged if a stamped, self-addressed postal card or envelope is enclosed.
<p>
<strong>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION:</strong> For further information on the transportation of spent nuclear fuel
and high-level radioactive waste under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, please contact: Ms. Corinne
Macaluso, Environmental and Operational Activities, Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management,
(RW-45), U.S. Department of Energy, 1000 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20585,
Telephone: 202-586-2837.
<p>
Information packets are available for interested persons who want background information about the
Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management transportation program and the Section 180(c) program
prior to providing comments.  To receive an information packet, please call 1-800-225-NWPA (or call
202-488-6720 in Washington, D.C.) or write to the OCRWM Information Center, 600 Maryland Avenue, Suite 695
Washington, D.C. 20026 or the Yucca Mountain Science Center, 4101B Meadows Lane, Las Vegas,
Nevada 89107.
<p>
Copies of comments received will be available for examination and may be photocopied at the
Department's Public Reading Room at 1000 Independence Avenue, S.W., Room 1E-190, Washington,
D.C.
<p>
<strong>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</strong>
<p>
<strong>I.  Purpose and Need for Agency Action</strong>
<p>
Under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, as amended (42 U.S.C. 10101 et seq.) (NWPA or "the Act"),
the Department of Energy (Department) is responsible for the disposal of high-level radioactive waste and
civilian spent nuclear fuel in a deep geologic repository.  The Department is also responsible for the
possible monitored retrievable storage (MRS) of spent nuclear fuel prior to disposal.  Additionally, the
Department is responsible for transportation of spent nuclear fuel and high-level nuclear waste to the
Department's disposal or storage sites.  To carry out these responsibilities, the Department is required to
implement Section 180(c) of the Act.  Section 180(c) of the Act requires the Department to provide
technical assistance and funds to States for training for public safety officials of appropriate units of local
government and Indian tribes through whose jurisdiction the Secretary plans to transport spent nuclear fuel
or high-level radioactive waste.  Section 180(c) further provides that training cover procedures required for
safe routine transportation of these materials, as well as procedures for dealing with emergency response
situations.  Section 180(c) identifies the Nuclear Waste Fund under the Act as the source of funds for work
carried out under this subsection. [42 U.S.C. 10175]

<p>
<strong>II.  Section 180(c) History</strong>
<p>
The Department issued a Notice of Inquiry in the<em> Federal Register</em> on January 3, 1995, (60 FR 99) which
briefly described various options to delineate Section 180(c) of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act policy and
procedures.  Members of the public were invited to submit comments on the Notice of Inquiry.  In the
March 14, 1995, Federal Register (60 FR 13715) the Department extended the deadline for comments to
May 18, 1995.  In response to requests for additional information, the Department issued another, more
detailed Notice of Inquiry in the <em>Federal Register </em>on July 18, 1995 (60 FR 36793).  Members of the public
were again invited to submit comments on the Notice of Inquiry.  In a continuing effort to include
stakeholders in predecisional discussions, the Department has developed the proposed Section 180(c)
policy and procedures, presented below, that comprise the Department's proposed approach to
implementing Section 180(c) of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act.  Included in this Notice is a summary of the
comments received from the two prior Notices of Inquiry and the Department's response to those
comments.  The Department welcomes comments in response to this<em> Federal Register</em> notice on the
proposed Section 180(c) policy and procedures.  
<p>
The Department plans to publish, in 1997, a Notice of Final Policy and Procedures that the Department
intends to follow in implementing the Section 180(c) program.  The Section 180(c) program encompasses
the shipment of spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste to a geologic repository or a monitored
retrievable storage facility pursuant to the NWPA.
<p>
The Department's work to date on the Section 180(c) policy and implementation procedures has been
discussed primarily in Transportation Coordination Group meetings and Transportation External
Coordination (TEC) Working Group meetings.  The Transportation External Working Group will continue
to meet periodically to identify and discuss issues related to the transport of radioactive materials.  In
addition, the Department has ten cooperative agreements with national and regional organizations
representing state, local and tribal constituencies to provide information and solicit input regarding the
transportation aspects of the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management program.
<p>
The Department has also released two documents that discuss Section 180(c) policy and implementation.
These two documents are the <em>Strategy for OCRWM to Provide Training Assistance to State, Tribal, and
Local Governments</em> (November 1992, DOE/RW-0374P) (the <em>Strategy</em> document), and the <em>Preliminary
Draft Options for Providing Technical Assistance and Funding Under Section 180(c) of the Nuclear
Waste Policy Act, as Amended</em> (November 1992) (the <em>Options</em> paper).  These documents are available by
requesting the information packet from the OCRWM National Information Center or the Yucca Mountain
Science Center.
<p>
<strong>III.  Proposed Section 180(c) Policy and Procedures</strong>
<p>
<em>Introduction</em>
<p>
This section is divided into four subject areas.  It includes a discussion of the proposed funding
mechanism, definitions of key terms, eligibility and timing of the grants, and allowable activities.  This
proposal is based on information gained by studying industry regulations, legal requirements, and
stakeholder comments.  <em>Funding Mechanism </em>describes the method by which funds would be disbursed to
states and tribes, hereafter referred to as jurisdictions. <em> Definition of Key Terms</em> describes the definition of
safe routine transportation and technical assistance for the purposes of the Section 180(c) program. 
<em>Eligibility and Timing of the Grants Program</em> describes when jurisdictions are eligible and the timing of
the grants process.  <em>Allowable Activities </em>describes the types of activities the funding could be used for as
well as some activities that would be disallowed.  The final policy and procedures may differ based on
comments received on this proposal, any new legislation, and any program and policy changes caused by
new Congressional direction. 
<p>
The Appendix to this Notice provides the cost basis for this proposed Section 180(c) program.
<p>
<em>Funding Mechanism</em>
<p>
The Department intends to implement Section 180(c) through an OCRWM grants program.  Funding
would be provided every year beginning approximately three years prior to the first shipment through a
state or tribal land.  The Department would administer the grants but the grants would be specific to the
Section 180(c) program and would not be combined with any other Department-sponsored transportation
preparedness or training programs, although coordination by jurisdictions would be encouraged.
<p>
The grant program would be administered in accordance with the DOE Financial Assistance rules (10 CFR
600), which implement OMB Circular A-87, Cost Principles for Grants, Contracts and Other Agreements
with Local Governments, OMB Circular A-102, Grants and Cooperative Agreements with State and Local
Governments, and OMB Circular A-128, Audits of State and Local Governments.  In order to preserve
flexibility, the Department does not presently plan to codify the policy and procedures in this notice as
substantive regulations. 
<p>
<em>Definitions of Key Terms</em>
<p>
The definition of safe routine transportation for the purposes of determining eligibility or allowable
activities under the Section 180(c) program would be as follows:
<p><ul>
 <li> <strong>Safe routine transportation </strong>means the enforcement of standards and inspection of shipments of spent
  nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste to a repository or an MRS pursuant to the NWPA
  through state, tribal, and local jurisdictions in a manner compliant with applicable Federal, state, tribal,
  and local laws and regulations.  Safe routine highway transportation is characterized by adequate
  vehicle, driver, and package inspection and enforcement of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
  Regulations and the Hazardous Materials Regulations.  Safe routine transportation is also characterized
  by compliance with rail and barge transportation regulations including Federal Railroad
  Administration (FRA) and Coast Guard regulations.
</ul><p>
The definition of technical assistance for the purposes of the Section 180(c) program would be as follows:
<p>
<ul><li> <strong> Technical assistance </strong>means assistance, other than financial assistance, that the Secretary of Energy
  can provide that is unique to the Department to aid training that will cover procedures for the safe,
  routine transportation and emergency response situations during the transport of spent nuclear fuel and
  high-level radioactive waste to a repository or MRS pursuant to the NWPA,  including, but not be
  limited to, the provision of training materials, the provision of public information materials, and access
  to individuals involved in the shipments.
</ul><p>
Technical assistance, as defined, would include access to the Department's regional and headquarters
representatives involved in the planning and operation of NWPA transportation or emergency
preparedness, provision of information packets that include information about the OCRWM program and
shipments, and attendance and support from OCRWM program representatives for public meetings upon
request and consistent with the OCRWM budget.  It would not include the provision of equipment,
although recipients would be able to budget up to ten percent of their allocated funds to purchase
equipment if they chose to do so.
<p>

<em>Eligibility and Timing of the Grants and Technical Assistance Program
</em><p>
The Department intends to provide grants and technical assistance under the Section 180(c) program for
the safe routine transportation of NWPA shipments as these terms are defined above.  The Department
intends that the application process for grants and technical assistance begin approximately four years prior
to transportation (about one year for the application process, about three years to implement the program)
through a jurisdiction.  The Department intends to notify the governor or tribal leader of the jurisdiction
with a letter and information packet, including an application.  The Department intends to calculate the
base amount and variable amount available to each jurisdiction and include that information in the
application package.  The governor or tribal leader would be requested to select one agency or
representative within the jurisdiction to apply for and administer the Section 180(c) grant and technical
assistance.  The administering agency or representative would indicate in the application how it intends to
use its budget.  If funding needs to be passed on to other agencies (for example, from the emergency
services agency to the highway patrol to pay for inspector training) then that would be the responsibility of
the recipient state or tribe.  That information should be identified in the application. 
<p>
Eligible jurisdictions would submit an application to the Department beginning approximately four years
prior to the first shipment through a jurisdiction.  The application would include a three-year plan detailing
how the funds would be spent each year.  Funding would be disbursed annually based on the applicant's
three-year plan.  Each jurisdiction would receive a base amount of funding for each year of eligibility.  A
variable amount of funding, based on route miles, would be available after the first year of eligibility for
those jurisdictions that qualify pursuant to the plan discussed in the Appendix.
<p>
Local governments would not apply for Section 180(c) grants or technical assistance directly.  Local
participation would be coordinated through the state or tribe, if they have subjurisdictions.  However, the
applicant would be required to demonstrate in its plan how the local jurisdictions are benefiting from the
program.  Each jurisdiction would be requested to submit a description of the coordination procedure as
part of its grant application.  This approach builds flexibility into the use of the funds and responds to
commenters' concerns that assistance may not reach the local level.
<p>
The Department anticipates knowing three to four years prior to shipment which states or tribal land the
shipments will travel through, even if routes have not been selected.  Using this information, the
Department would notify these jurisdictions about their potential eligibility for the Section 180(c) program. 
The Department would include in the information to the jurisdiction the total amount of budget it would be
eligible for as determined by the cost estimates described in the Appendix to this Notice.  Two years prior
to the shipments going through a jurisdiction, the Department would announce proposed routes.  
<p>
Within the first year of eligibility to receive funding (Transportation Year [defined as the year that
shipments will commence] minus 3 or TY-3), a base grant would be available.
<p>
Within the second year of eligibility (Transportation Year minus 2 or TY-2), a base grant and a variable
amount of money for those jurisdictions that qualify would be available.  Proposed routes would be
announced during the second year of eligibility.
<p>
Within the third year of eligibility (Transportation Year minus 1 or TY-1), a base grant and a variable
amount of money for those jurisdictions that qualify would be available.  
<p>
A state or tribe would continue to be eligible for and receive Transportation Year grants as long as NWPA
shipments go through its jurisdiction each year.   If there is a lapse of NWPA shipments for three or more
years, the state or tribe would receive no funds for those years and would only regain eligibility three years
prior to another NWPA shipment through its jurisdiction.  Three years prior to the resumption of
shipments through its borders, a state or tribe may again apply for TY-1 grants.  If the lapse is of two years
or less between shipments, the Transportation Year grants would continue as if shipments had been
traversing that jurisdiction during the lapse.
<p>
A significant route change made later than two years prior to the expected start of NWPA shipments
through a jurisdiction could generate some difficulty in administering Section 180(c).  The Section 180(c)
program would include contingencies for changes in schedule and route.  In general, jurisdictions may
receive an additional amount of funding and technical assistance if asked to complete activities in shorter
amounts of time, i.e., a state may receive TY-1 and TY-2 funding in the same year.  If the route change is
made too close to the time of shipment to allow for Section 180(c) preparations, OCRWM may use escorts
with more training and equipment than those currently used for the purpose of safeguards until a
reasonable time period for training has expired.
<p>
<em>Allowable Activities for Funding</em>
<p>
This section describes the types of activities that would be allowed under this proposal and some of the
specific activities that would be disallowed.  This is not meant to be a comprehensive list, but merely a
guide to the types of activities an applicant jurisdiction might consider and some of the activities that
would be considered outside the scope of the program and therefore not eligible for Section 180(c)
funding.
<p>
For the most part, it would be the applicant's decision as to who gets trained, the level of training obtained,
and the organization that administers the training.  Applicants would be encouraged to describe in their
three-year plans how the budget would be integrated with other available training such as that offered
through the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the
Conference on Hazardous Materials Enforcement Development, the state, or regional organizations.  The
application package would request information on how the applicant would use the budget as part of a
larger effort to augment their current infrastructure for safe routine transportation procedures and
emergency response as well as how the applicant anticipates using technical assistance.
<p>
Specifically, an applicant would be able to budget up to ten percent of each year's 180(c) funds to
purchase appropriate (i.e., training-related) equipment provided the equipment is identified in its
application and approved in the grant.
<p>
Funding may be used for refresher training and to train new public safety personnel.  During the years
NWPA transportation is occurring in a jurisdiction (Transportation Year), two-thirds of the budget
provided in TY-1 would help offset the costs of refresher and new personnel training.  The two-thirds
multiplier is a conservative estimate based on the assumption that after the initial training in TY-1 and TY-2, each jurisdiction would experience a personnel turnover rate of approximately two-thirds of its staff
each year.  The turnover of personnel, particularly in the emergency response area, means that new people
will need training if shipments continue through a jurisdiction over an extended period of time.  It would
be the jurisdiction's choice, within the limits of their Section 180(c) annual budget, to determine who
receives refresher training and with what frequency.  It would also be the jurisdiction's choice, within the
limits of its annual Section 180(c) budget, which new personnel receive training and the type and location
of the training.
<p>

Section 180(c) funds would not be available for the conduct of drills and exercises.  The Department
anticipates that it will conduct drills and exercises which will be conducted in conjunction with states,
tribes and local governments in preparation for NWPA shipments.  However, drills and exercises are
generally considered a means to measure preparedness, an activity the Department views as beyond the
scope of the 180(c) program which is limited by statute to provision of funds and technical assistance for
training.
<p>
<strong>IV.  Discussion of Comments Received on the NOIs</strong>
<p>
The Department received 38 comments in response to the January 3, 1995, Notice of Inquiry and an
additional 13 comments in response to the July 18, 1995, Notice of Inquiry:  Supplemental Information. 
Comments were received from the Council of State Governments--Midwestern Office, Council of State
Governments/Eastern Regional Conference, Southern States Energy Board, Western Interstate Energy
Board, two private citizens, Ohio Division of Emergency Medical Services, State of California Department
of Transportation, White Pine County Nuclear Waste Project Office, Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance,
International Association of Fire Fighters, Texas Department of Public Safety, Lander County
Commission, Yakima Indian Nation, Nevada Agency for Nuclear Projects, Association of American
Railroads, Nye County Nuclear Waste Repository Project Office, Oregon Department of Energy, State of
Kansas, Eureka County Yucca Mountain Information Office, New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department, National Conference of State Legislatures, County of Inyo Planning Department,
Nuclear Waste Repository Oversight Program, National Congress of American Indians, Conference of
Radiation Control Program Directors, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Lincoln County Nuclear
Waste Project, Nuclear Energy Institute, Vermont Department of Public Service, Commonwealth Edison
Company, Ohio Emergency Management Agency, Clark County Department of Comprehensive Planning,
Public Utilities Commission of Ohio, Northern States Power Company, Ohio Emergency Management
Agency, Virginia Power, State of Nebraska Civil Defense Agency and the State of Colorado.  The
commenters held very diverse opinions; no single theme for implementing Section 180(c) was apparent.
<p>
The following section discusses general categories and summarizes major points of the comments and the
Department's response.  
<p>
<em>Major Issues</em>
<p>
<strong>A.  Section 180(c) Policy</strong>
<p>
The commenters raised many topics related to defining a  Section 180(c) policy.  Although the Department
recognizes that these topics are closely related and overlap each other, this section divides those topics into
the following subsections:  general themes for a Section 180(c) program, safe routine transportation,
emergency response procedures, eligibility criteria, funding allocation formula, allowable use of funds,
technical assistance and equipment, and concerns of rural and tribal governments.
<p>
<em>General Themes</em>
<p>
A number of commenters offered ideas about the philosophy and general structure of the 180(c) program. 
These ranged from developing a needs-based type of program to one that offers assistance for an additional
incremental level of training in existing hazardous materials transportation training to cover NWPA
shipments.  An example of comments related to a needs-based program is the Colorado Emergency
Planning Commission recommendation to conduct a risk assessment that balances the likelihood of an
accident, the response capability of the jurisdiction to react, and the likely affected population, then, from
that assessment, identify the preparedness, response, and recovery needs of each jurisdiction.  Similarly,
the Western Governors' Association (WGA), through the Western Interstate Energy Board, submitted
straw man regulations for a program that assesses the current capabilities of jurisdictions, assesses the
needed level of readiness for NWPA shipments, and then provides Section 180(c) assistance to make up
the difference.  WGA suggested that planning grants could be used to fund jurisdictions to complete the
capabilities assessment while implementation grants could be used to carry out the identified activities. 
They recommended the Department fund one national and several regional training advisory committees to
help states and tribes coordinate their training activities.  Most of the comments supporting a needs-based
program either implied or stated the belief that Section 180(c) assistance should cover all costs associated
with the Federal government's transportation of spent nuclear fuel.  
<p>
In contrast, other comments urged the Department to only provide training and assistance as an increment
above what currently exists.  These comments urged the Department to take into account the low level of
risk presented by spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste shipments and proportion the
assistance and training among recipients accordingly.  These commenters maintained that current
hazardous materials transportation training for safe routine and emergency response procedures is
sufficient to handle any transportation radiological accident that may occur.  Creating a Section 180(c)
program that goes beyond current hazardous materials transportation training would send a message that
the NWPA shipments are more hazardous than they really are.  Still other commenters stated that nuclear
utilities will, in effect, pay twice for emergency response and safe routine practices through contributions
to the Nuclear Waste Fund, the Hazardous Materials Transportation Uniform Safety Act fees for
transporters of hazardous material, and through various state and local fee assessments and programs. 
<p>
Other recurring comments urged the Department to either not ship or to limit the number of shipments
until a Section 180(c) program is in place.  This comment was frequently presented in conjunction with the
belief that the Department has an obligation to accept waste in 1998, and if Congress identifies a storage
facility, shipping may well begin in 1998 or shortly thereafter.  In addition, these commenters urged the
Department to accelerate Section 180(c) implementation and to ask for a Section 180(c) budget allocation
in the 1996 budget request to Congress. 
<p>
Several commenters encouraged the Department to begin as soon as possible the process of route selection,
in cooperation with the states, to give jurisdictions sufficient time to assess their training needs.  They
argued that jurisdictions need to know what routes will be used so that they may begin planning
immediately for shipments and be prepared if shipping occurs within the next few years.
<p>
<em>Response</em>
<p>
 It is the Department's position that the purpose of a Section 180(c) program is to provide jurisdictions
assistance in an increment above their current level of preparedness rather than to supply complete
emergency response or safe routine transportation capabilities along NWPA transportation routes.  Other
Federal agencies such as FEMA and the Department of Transportation, as part of their respective missions,
assist states and tribes in the creation of more comprehensive emergency response and safe routine
transportation capabilities.  Therefore, this proposal is designed to provide incremental assistance, above
what currently exists, to help jurisdictions prepare for NWPA shipments.  This program, in combination
with the Department's emergency response capabilities, will help jurisdictions train for these shipments
and increase their preparedness level. 
<p>
While the Department has not adopted the Western Governor's Association straw man regulations
specifically, the Department's proposal would allow states and tribes the flexibility to implement many
provisions of the straw man regulations as they choose.  The Department's proposed technical assistance
would help provide the planning and coordination called for in the straw man regulations at a reasonable
cost to the program.  In addition, the proposed training advisory groups could drain financial assistance
away from recipient jurisdictions.  Training up to two years prior to shipments will provide inspectors and
emergency responders with current information about the NWPA shipments.
<p>
Regarding the concern that shipments will occur with less than three years' preparation, this proposed
policy includes a contingency plan should the Department have to ship spent fuel through a jurisdiction
with less than three years notice.  In addition, the Department will work with jurisdictions on a case-by-case basis to meet the intent of Section 180(c) prior to any shipments through a jurisdiction.  
<p>
Regarding the comments that the Department should request Section 180(c) funding in fiscal year 1996
and announce routes as soon as possible, funding requests for Section 180(c) and a determination of routes
cannot be completed until a destination and initial shipping date have been identified. 
<p>
<em>Safe routine transportation</em>
<p>
Commenters offered several suggestions concerning the definition of safe routine transportation as used in
180(c).  Four commenters specifically supported the Transportation External Coordination Working Group
definition while other commenters wrote more expansive definitions to include combinations of alternate
route analysis, inspection and enforcement training, en route contingency plans, transportation
infrastructure improvements, shipment notification and tracking, escorts, public information, and
development and distribution of training curricula and course materials.  The Western Governor's
Association straw man regulations would add record-keeping audits, operating protocols, and improving
confidence in the shipping package to the definition.
<p>
A number of viewpoints were expressed on inspections as part of safe routine transportation activities.  For
example, the Public Utility Commission of Ohio stated that safe routine transportation includes more than
inspections and should include detailed carrier and shipper compliance reviews pursuant to 49 CFR 100-177 requirements.  The Department was also encouraged to develop inspection standards for rail transport
serving the same purpose as the Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance's enhanced inspection standards for
truck shipments.  
<p>
Regarding the relative emphasis and scope of safe routine transportation activities, the Council of State
Governments -- Midwestern Office and the Public Utility Commission of Ohio recommended placing
equal emphasis on safe routine transportation activities as on emergency response activities.  In contrast,
the Ohio Emergency Management Agency recommended placing more emphasis on emergency response
activities.  One commenter said Section 180(c) assistance should fully fund state costs for state inspections
and escorts related to NWPA shipments.
<p>
The need for and training of escorts was also a topic.  The Conference of Radiation Control Program
Directors questioned the need for escorts as an expensive option considering the actual level of risk
compared to other hazardous material shipments.  Two commenters called for the Department to examine
the possibility of either state or Federal response teams traveling with the shipments to reduce the need for
local first-responder training.
<p>
A global positioning system for shipment tracking was encouraged as a way to build trust in the safety of
the shipments and work more closely with the corridor jurisdictions.
<p>
<em>Response</em>
<p>
The definition of safe routine transportation proposed in this notice combines part of the TEC definition
and the Strategy document definition.  The complete TEC definition was not used because it is very broad
and does not indicate specifically what training for safe routine transportation activities would be covered
by Section 180(c) assistance.  Many activities suggested in the comments are already required of the
shipper or carrier such as developing operating protocols and using escorts.  This negates the need to
include the activities in the definition of safe routine transportation for the purposes of providing Section
180(c) assistance.  Some other requested activities, such as alternate route analysis and record-keeping
audits, are outside the realm of training for safe transport of NWPA shipments, and therefore not included
in the definition. 
<p>
Regarding the comments that the Department should develop rail inspection standards, the Department
representatives will work cooperatively with the railroad companies and the Federal Railroad
Administration (FRA) on inspection and enforcement matters.  Both the rail companies and the FRA have
stringent standards for the transportation of spent nuclear fuel and high-level nuclear waste.  The
Department has no plans to develop rail inspection criteria.
<p>
The proposed policy permits enough flexibility that a recipient jurisdiction may distribute the money
between training for emergency response procedures and safe routine transportation procedures as they
choose.  Again, this proposal is intended to assist jurisdictions to incrementally increase their level of
preparedness for NWPA shipments.  However, the Department maintains the position that to pay for all
costs associated with state inspections and escorts is beyond the scope of the Section 180(c) program and is
not necessary for shipment safety. 
<p>
These shipments will be made in accordance with NRC safeguards and security requirements.  The issue of
whether escorts must be used is partially answered by NRC regulations, which require escorts (10 CFR
73.37). 
<p>
<em>Emergency response procedures</em>
<p>
The comments on providing assistance for emergency response training procedures were particularly
varied. In keeping with the needs-based approach to assistance, a number of commenters recommended
funding planning activities to determine the type and amount of training.   These suggestions include
Departmental delineation of the roles and responsibilities of each jurisdiction in an emergency response
situation and assistance to each jurisdiction in carrying out that role; funding to jurisdictions to conduct
route and risk assessments prior to deciding whom to train and to what standards; or using the State
Emergency Response Commissions and the Local Emergency Planning Committees as points of contact to
decide who should receive assistance and to determine the needed level of training.
<p>
Various training standards for different levels of responders were also suggested.  These included
awareness training for local first-responders and higher-level training for more specialized responders,
refresher training for first-responders, maintenance of on-call systems for radiological responders, and
periodic exercises for personnel responding to accidents.  The Western Governor's Association straw man
regulations recommended the above activities plus accident notification, safe parking procedures,
equipping personnel responding to NWPA accidents, development and/or revision of courses and course
materials, and assessing opportunities to coordinate training, emergency response, and exercises.  One
commenter praised the emergency response training at the Department's Nevada Test Site and asked that it
be used for Section 180(c) funded training. 
<p>
A frequent comment supported integration of emergency response training for local public safety officials
into existing hazardous materials training because the response requirements for radiological incidents fall
within the requirements for other hazardous materials shipments.
<p>
The Council of State Governments -- Midwestern Office asserted that current capabilities at the state, tribal
and local level are inadequate in most jurisdictions to handle the number and frequency of planned
OCRWM shipments.  In contrast, two other commenters recommended only incremental assistance to first-responders because current Departmental resources can support any incident that may occur during
transport.
<p>
Comments on training for hospital personnel ranged from the need to provide awareness training to
specialized decontamination equipment and training.  Two commenters argued that training for hospital
personnel was not necessary at all.  The Council of State Governments/Eastern Regional Conference said
assistance was not necessary for hospitals because the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care
Organizations requires hospitals to be able to treat patients exposed to radioactive contamination before
receiving their accreditation.
<p>
<em>Response</em>
<p>
This proposed policy is flexible enough that a recipient jurisdiction could conduct many of the suggested
activities.  The Department recognizes the need for clear lines of responsibility and communication during
a transportation emergency and anticipates working with recipient jurisdictions on these matters through
the provision of technical assistance and, as budget allows, by conducting exercises and drills.  While
exercises and drills, will be conducted separately from the Section 180(c) program, the assistance may be
used to support participation in, or observation of, exercises and drills if the recipient jurisdiction desires. 
Similarly, reliance on the State Emergency and Response Commissions and Local Emergency Planning
Committees infrastructure will be left to the applicant jurisdiction's discretion.  This proposal does not
allow Section 180(c) assistance to be used to conduct route and risk assessments because these activities
are outside the scope of training for emergency response and safe routine transportation activities. 
<p>
Regarding the specific activities allowed under this proposal, each jurisdiction will be allowed to choose
the training they wish and to train the public safety personnel of their choosing.  The funding provided is
intended to defray the costs of attending advanced courses such as those offered by the Department.  In
many cases, the applicants will have their own less expensive training programs (FEMA and the
Department do not charge tuition, although this proposal uses the cost of tuition as a basis of the estimate
for the cost of each trainee) and may use the remaining assistance for other activities related to training for
safe routine and emergency response transportation procedures.
<p>
The Department will provide awareness training materials for local responders and public information
material to the recipient jurisdictions.  For more advanced training courses, it is expected the recipient
jurisdictions will either use their own training courses, if available, or attend existing hazardous materials
or radiological emergency response classes.  Equipment will not be provided for directly, but up to ten
percent of a recipient's funds may be used to purchase equipment of the recipient's choosing.  Again, the
basis of estimate in the proposal does not explicitly provide for training hospital personnel, but recipient
jurisdictions may use their funds for this purpose if they choose.  The Department's awareness materials
will include information about Oak Ridge National Laboratory's Radiological Emergency Assistance
Center and Training Site and its 24-hour on-call assistance.
<p>
Regarding the preparedness level of state and tribal jurisdictions, the Department understands that there are
greatly varying levels of preparedness.  The financial and technical assistance provided through this
proposed program, in combination with the Department's resources, will assist recipient jurisdictions to
incrementally increase their level of preparedness for NWPA shipments.   The Department will work with
a jurisdiction to provide information about the shipments, the safety precautions taken, and the
Department's resources to assist the jurisdiction in case of an accident or incident.
<p>
<em>Eligibility criteria</em>
<p>
Comments on eligibility criteria focused on which jurisdictional level should be eligible to apply for funds.
Some argued that if local governments were eligible to receive funds directly, then this would reduce
administrative costs and give local governments more control over the assistance.  Several counties simply
requested that they be guaranteed an amount of budget and given some discretion in using the assistance.
Other commenters said only state and tribal agencies are eligible to apply for assistance.  Some
commenters made suggestions regarding how the timing of NWPA shipments through a jurisdiction
impacts eligibility. The WGA straw man regulations defined an eligible state or tribe as "a host(s) and
corridor states or Indian tribes through which shipments under the NWPA are planned within six years." 
Others said training should begin from one to three years prior to shipment.  

One commenter said that eligibility should not be restricted by waste type or destination, but rather should
help local governments prepare for all types of hazardous materials transportation emergencies.


The point was also raised that tribes and states near, but not on, transportation routes should be eligible for
assistance, since their lands and people would be at risk in case of a transportation accident or incident. 
Another commenter disagreed, saying that only jurisdictions traversed by NWPA shipments should be
eligible for assistance.

Response

The Department based its proposed requirements for eligibility on the wording in the NWPA and the
Department's prior discussions with stakeholders about beginning assistance three-to-five years prior to
commencement of shipping through a jurisdiction.  The statute provides that state governments determine
how best to allocate the assistance to local jurisdictions. The Department plans to assist tribal governments
directly unless requested otherwise by the tribal government.  Recipients will be required to encourage
local government participation in planning and training and to provide awareness training materials and
public information supplied by the Department to local public safety officials along the shipment routes.  
<p>
The Department does not propose to use the Western Governor's Association straw man regulations
indicating that eligible jurisdictions should receive assistance six years prior to transportation.  Since states
and tribes have primary responsibility to plan for hazardous materials transportation through their
jurisdictions regardless of Federal shipments, and given the high rate of turnover among emergency
response personnel, the Department believes that assistance provided so far in advance of shipments would
not be effective.  
<p>
In response to the request to provide assistance regardless of destination or type of waste, Section 180(c)
provides that assistance is only available for those jurisdictions through whom the Secretary [of Energy]
plans to ship spent nuclear fuel and high-level nuclear waste to a repository or MRS under the NWPA. 
Assistance will not be provided to jurisdictions that do not have NWPA shipments through their borders,
nor will assistance be provided for other types of wastes.  
<p>
<i>Funding allocation formula</i>
<p>
Once eligibility criteria are determined, the total assistance available will have to be allocated among the
eligible parties.  Commenters were explicit in their views of how funds should be allocated.  A frequent
comment was that funds should be allocated according to the shipment miles through a jurisdiction. The
Western Governor's Association defined shipment miles as the product of the expected number of
shipments multiplied by the distance of such shipments.  The Western Governor's Association straw man
regulations recommended annual implementation grants of 75% of the funds allocated according to
shipment miles and 25% allocated to ensure minimum funding levels and program capabilities. The
Nuclear Energy Institute countered that the number of shipment miles through a jurisdiction does not
automatically result in greater impact to a jurisdiction and therefore should not qualify them for additional
assistance.  
<p>
Other commenters suggested funding be allocated to each eligible jurisdiction based on a formula that
includes both the number of route miles in the jurisdiction and the population at risk along the shipment
route(s), with consideration given to existing capabilities, and to the number of shipments.  Population was
frequently mentioned as a valid determinant of funding allocations.  Several commenters stated that there
should be a base level of funding for each jurisdiction.
<p>
The Council of State Governments--Midwestern Office and Commonwealth Edison Company
recommended that the Department consult with recipients to determine their funding level based on the
impact of the shipments to that jurisdiction.  The Council of State Governments /Eastern Regional
Conference said the funds for first-responders should be proportional to the number of responders along a
route and the funding available for inspectors should be a function of the number of shipments.
<p>
The Texas Department of Public Safety recommended using the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act
Training and Planning Grants approach to allocating funds. 
<p>
<em>Response</em>
<p>
The Department agrees with many commenters that a base level of assistance should be available to all
jurisdictions to be crossed by NWPA shipments.  Number of shipments was not used as a determinant of
funding level because training of safety officials is required no matter how many shipments cross their
jurisdiction.  A jurisdiction may need additional inspectors as the number of shipments increases. 
Population was not used to determine funding levels because the same level of effort is required in
responding to an emergency no matter how many people may be affected.
<p>
The Department does not foresee working with each eligible jurisdiction to determine assistance levels
because the number of eligible jurisdictions in a given year would make such an interactive process
prohibitively costly, lengthy and administratively burdensome.  It would require significant resources from
both the Department and the applicant with little or no increased level of safety.  Jurisdictions will be able
to obtain guidance from Department representatives to determine how best to allocate the funds and what
type of training to obtain. 
<p>
The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act model for fund allocation has merit but the Department
believes the allocation method proposed in this Notice is more appropriate to a Section 180(c) program.
The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act program has virtually the same number of eligible
jurisdictions from year to year whereas the Section 180(c) program may have large annual variations in the
number of eligible jurisdictions.  The funding allocation method proposed in the appendix of this Notice
would allow the Department to prepare its draft annual budget request based on anticipated needs for each
year of shipment.   Finally, both the Department and some commenters maintain that the reimbursement
aspect of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act is not appropriate for a Section 180(c) program.
<p>
<em>Allowable use of funds</em>
<p>
Elements of this discussion overlap with the discussion of program scope and the definitions of key terms.
Several state agencies and organizations said that states and tribes should prioritize their own training
needs.  They argued that the Department must balance accountability with an applicant's need for latitude
in deciding how to spend funds because of the varying levels of preparedness, divisions of responsibility,
and other differences.  Commenters suggested the Department could help recipient jurisdictions by
supplying information and expertise to help beneficiaries determine how best to use the funds.
<p>
Many commenters, however, said that the final allocation of funding should guarantee a specific portion of
the funding for local governments to use as they see best.  Other suggestions were to give local
governments explicit standing on any planning, training or advisory groups formed as a result of Section
180(c), to reserve a certain percentage of the funds for distribution to local governments, and to require
recipients to notify local governments of the program and to encourage their participation.  One commenter
objected to exclusively funding training for local governments and excluding training for state personnel
and recommended the Department check the intent of Congress in this regard.
<p>
Other commenters argued that the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act grant program provides a good
model for allowable activities.  These regulations require recipient jurisdictions to describe existing
programs and explain how the requested funds supply necessary improvements to the existing capabilities.
They also provide for monitoring of the program's effectiveness.  The Department's Waste Isolation Pilot
Plant (WIPP) assistance program was also mentioned as a successful model to help determine allowable
activities.
<p>
Two states said that Section 180(c) assistance should pay for infrastructure improvements along routes. 
Another frequently mentioned point was that the Section 180(c) program should not require any matching
funds from the jurisdiction in order to receive assistance.  The Western Governor's Association straw man
regulations provide that the funds be distributed for training along specific shipment routes, unlike FEMA
programs that work to enhance overall preparedness.  Several comments recommended that exercises and
drills be funded by Section 180(c) assistance, either to test the adequacy of the training or to determine the
training needed.
<p>
<em>Response</em>
<p>
The Department's proposal would allow states and tribes to determine their own training needs as long as
it is in accordance with their current public safety infrastructure.  The Department took this approach
because it allows maximum flexibility for applicants to tailor the assistance to their priorities.  Because of
the need for flexibility, the proposal does not require applicants to provide a guaranteed percentage of
funds to local public safety officials.  The Department's existing grants process under 10 CFR Part 600
would provide for accountability with 10 CFR Part 600 without being too cumbersome for the Department
or the applicants and would allow Department representatives to provide advice and answer questions.  We
do not intend to request matching funds because most commenters and the Department found no basis for
such a requirement and there is no legal requirement for matching funds.
<p>
The Hazardous Materials Transportation Act and WIPP examples for allowable use of funds both have
merit.  If a jurisdiction wishes to follow the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act or WIPP example in
prioritizing use of their grant monies, that would be described in the grant application.  Similarly,
recipients may decide to provide funds only along a route or throughout their jurisdiction as they choose. 
Recipients would not be prevented from using the assistance to participate in, or observe, exercises and
drills but they are not included in the Department's proposed basis for estimating funding levels.
<p>
Section 180(c) authorizes assistance only for training.  Therefore, the Department does not intend to allow
the use of 180(c) funds for infrastructure improvements. 
<p>
<em>Technical assistance and equipment</em>
<p>
Almost every comment that addressed the issue of technical assistance identified the need for equipment. 
Some commenters suggested that the Department use the Transportation External Coordination Working
Group definition of technical assistance.  Another suggested using the Department's 1992 Draft Options
Paper definition.   The Council of State Governments -- Midwestern Office offered the following
definition, "The term  technical assistance' as it is used in Section 180(c) of the Nuclear Waste Policy Act
means a variety of activities designed to ensure that state, tribal and local governments are trained for safe
routine transportation practices as well as responding to transportation emergencies within their
jurisdictions, including but not limited to planning guidance, training support, practical support, funding of
pre-identified equipment, and expertise."  They also believe the Department should supply funding for
equipment, its maintenance and calibration, and that states should have funding to purchase computer
software and hardware to assist with monitoring and response activities.
<p>
New Mexico specifically stated it preferred the TEC definition's greater specificity and clarity over the
definition offered by the Council of State Governments -- Midwestern Office.  "However, [it]
recommend[ed] two revisions to the definition: 1) The first sentence should read  ...to ensure that States
and tribal governments are trained for safe routine transportation practices as well as capable of responding
safely and effectively to spent nuclear fuel and high-level waste transportation emergencies with their
jurisdictions.'  2) The second sentence should read  ...and for public information, outreach, and
participation efforts.' " 
<p>
Other suggestions were broader in their application, encompassing such things as emergency response
equipment, inspection equipment, assistance in route planning, emergency response plan development,
course development and exercises, tracking capability, equipment and training for hospital personnel,
24-hour access to Federal radiological safety personnel, carrier qualifications, and funding, among others.
<p>
The Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors questioned the need for equipment, especially for
local responders. They argued that the low risk of these shipments does not justify a response capability
beyond what currently exists.  FEMA, on the other hand, offered its assistance to the Department in
providing technical assistance and equipment to responders through its role as provider of emergency and
disaster preparedness for state, tribal, and local governments.
<p>
<em>Response</em>
<p>
The definition of technical assistance proposed in this Notice combines parts of the Strategy definition and
the Transportation External Coordination Working Group definition.  The bulk of the Transportation
External Coordination Working Group definition was not included because many of the activities listed,
such as assistance in route planning, maintaining equipment, providing on-site emergency response
assistance, and remediation assistance are outside the scope of training and therefore not covered by
Section 180(c).  The Department has resources already available, upon request of the state or tribe, to
provide monitoring and recovery advice if there has been an accident or incident.  In addition, the shipper
and carrier can provide shipment-specific assistance. 
<p>
The definition in this proposal allows for Department representatives to provide technical support on
training needs and response strategies as budget constraints allow.  As explained in the proposal, conduct
of drills and exercises are not included under the definition of technical assistance although it is anticipated
that the NWPA transportation staff, or DOE representatives, may, as budget allows, conduct exercises and
drills with state, local, and tribal jurisdictions along the transportation routes. 
<p>
<em>Concerns of rural and tribal governments</em>
<p>
Few additional comments that dealt specifically with the concerns of rural and tribal governments were
received in response to the July 18, Notice of Inquiry.  Both New Mexico and the Council of State
Governments--Midwestern Office reiterated the Department's responsibility to work with tribes on a
government-to-government basis.  Other comments stressed the Department's Trust responsibility towards
tribal governments.  One comment encouraged the Department to begin direct communications with tribal
governments near reactor locations to address their particular concerns. The Department was also
encouraged to contact tribal governments who may not know they could have NWPA shipments crossing
their lands.
<p>
Commenters encouraged the Department to take extra steps to address the lack of infrastructure and
resources on many of the tribal lands that will be crossed by NWPA shipments.  Recommendations
included providing resources to allow tribes to participate in the OCRWM program and beginning early to
build an emergency response infrastructure for those tribes lacking basic infrastructure. One comment
urged expansion of the cooperative agreement with the National Congress of American Indians to help
facilitate communication with tribal governments.
<p>
Other commenters suggested how a Section 180(c) program could address the concerns specific to rural
areas. Rural jurisdictions often rely heavily on volunteer public safety personnel with high turnover rates,
serve large areas with few staff, have few resources for training, with little or no ability to travel to obtain
training. The commenters encouraged the Department to offer training in the communities where the local
responders reside and to guarantee that certain levels of training and equipment would be supplied.
<p>
<em>Response</em>
<p>
The Department recognizes that there is a lack of infrastructure and trained personnel on many tribal lands
and in many rural counties across the nation.  Typically, these areas may rely more heavily on technical
assistance than other recipient jurisdictions.  As stated earlier, the Department believes that a jurisdiction's
lack of emergency response infrastructure does not compromise shipment safety when a jurisdiction is
aware of the steps taken to ensure safety and the Department's readiness to provide on-site assistance.  The
basic awareness training modules will be provided to jurisdictions to distribute to responders along each
shipping route and will not require public safety officials to travel outside their jurisdiction.  These training
modules will inform local public safety officials of what steps to take in case of a transportation emergency
in their jurisdiction and what staff will be traveling with the shipments that can be a source of information
and assistance. 
<p>
The Department has agreed to work directly with tribal governments unless requested otherwise by the
applicant.  As far as working with tribes located near reactors sites, the Department will continue to work
through the mechanism of its cooperative agreement with the National Congress of American Indians to
reach out to tribes across the nation and encourage their participation in the program.
<p>
<strong>B. Section 180(c) Procedures</strong>
<p>
The comments received from both Notices showed a preference among the commenters for an OCRWM
grants program.  While twelve commenters recommended a Department or OCRWM grants program, eight
commenters supported the next most popular option, the use of existing Federal programs.  Of these, four
recommended using FEMA, two recommended the Department of Transportation's Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act program, and two recommended other Federal programs.  At the same time, eight
commenters specifically criticized the use of existing Federal programs.  Three commenters either
requested a combination of options or expressed moderate support for a combination of options; one
commenter said this was not viable.  Three commenters were opposed to disbursing the funds through
cooperative agreements, whereas eight commenters said cooperative agreements were either a very good
idea or gave conditional support for the idea.  Several commenters identified a preferred option but also
listed other options as acceptable.
<p>
The most common theme among the comments on procedural options was the importance of minimizing
the administrative burden on all parties.  Another common theme was to limit the layers of bureaucracy
and administration through which funding must pass.
<p>
The following describes more detailed comments provided about each option.
<p>
Use established federal agency programs other than the Department's
<p>
The Council of State Governments/Eastern Regional Conference, the Ohio Emergency Management
Agency, the Texas Department of Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management and FEMA all
commented that receiving additional assistance through FEMA's Comprehensive Cooperative Agreement
program (to be replaced with the Performance Partnership Agreements beginning in FY96) would be the
least administratively burdensome since they already participate in this FEMA program.  The Council of
State Governments--Midwestern Office commented that FEMA should be a vehicle for assistance only
after the Department and the recipient have agreed to use FEMA for that recipient.  The Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act grant program was mentioned by the Nuclear Energy Institute and Northern
States Power Company as a desirable option to reduce multiple Federal programs and the chance that
utilities would pay twice for emergency response through hazardous materials transportation fees and the
Nuclear Waste Fund.
<p>
FEMA provided descriptions of their current regulatory authority to monitor and assess emergency
management plans and preparedness, and a proposal for how they could administer the Section 180(c)
program.  FEMA discussed its current training programs and expertise in the emergency management field
and stressed its all-hazards approach to preparedness that includes radioactive materials shipments within
the larger scope of emergency preparedness.
<p>
The most common concern from the state and county perspective was that other Federal programs would
add administrative layers and reduce the funds available for the recipients.  The Western Interstate Energy
Board, in particular, felt that FEMA was not an appropriate avenue because "FEMA's Comprehensive
Cooperative Agreement program has been the subject of substantial disagreement with several western
states and is viewed by experts in our region as ineffective and inappropriate for dealing with spent nuclear
fuel or high-level radioactive waste."  In fact, one commenter criticized FEMA for placing emphasis on
preparations for nuclear attacks rather than transportation incidents.  The Hazardous Materials
Transportation Act and FRA programs were seen as too narrowly focused to work well as a vehicle to
implement a Section 180(c) program. 
<p>
From the tribal perspective, the most common critique of other Federal programs was that none of the
options discussed in the Notices has an effective mechanism in place to work with tribes.  Commenters
advocated exploration of other funding mechanisms that tribes use more frequently, such as the
Department of Housing and Urban Development Community Development and Block Grant Program, and
suggested establishing a separate funding mechanism for tribal governments.  
<p>
Other commenters were concerned that using other Federal programs would diminish focus on NWPA
shipment safety and increase impacts from government downsizing.  The Commercial Vehicle Safety
Association also pointed out that it may put expertise and training further away from the intended delivery
point.
<p>
<em>Establish agreements with state, local, tribal, and other organizations</em>
<p>
This option prompted a variety of interpretations.  Agreements or Memoranda of Understanding among
recipients, agreements between the Department and recipients, or agreements between the Department and
regional or national coordinating organizations were all discussed.  Some identified the potential
improvements in regional cooperation and efficiency as the biggest benefit to establishing agreements with
regional or national organizations.  One commenter suggested cooperative agreements would allow
negotiations each year between recipients and the Department that would permit adjustment among
recipients' with dissimilar training goals.  The Colorado Emergency Planning Commission said
consideration should be given to working through the WGA or a similar organization to promote
coordination.  The Commission suggested that WIPP's cooperative agreement with WGA could be a
useful mechanism to mimic.
<p>
Expanding the cooperative agreement with the National Congress of American Indians was recommended
as a possible way to ensure up front consultation with tribal recipients.  Such expansion of cooperative
agreements with tribes could balance the differences between tribes and other recipients governments.
<p>
Many commenters, however, saw the development of cooperative agreements as a lengthy, involved
process that could take too long to implement effectively.  Two commenters specifically noted the WIPP
cooperative agreements worked well because there was a smaller group of participants and it was
developed over several years.  NWPA requirements may not be compatible with this experience.  This
option was criticized for creating an unnecessary administrative layer that would take away from total
funding to be spent on training.
<p> 
Other comments encouraged cooperative agreements with organizations that could, in turn, train state,
local and tribal public safety officials. The Association of American Railroads' Technical Training Center
in Pueblo, Colorado and the Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance were both identified as organizations
with the capability to train recipients for emergency response for rail incidents and for truck inspections,
respectively. 
<p>
<em>Establish a Department-wide grant program</em>
<p>
Response to this option was mixed.  Some called a Department-wide program inappropriate, citing the
difficulty of co-mingling Nuclear Waste Fund money with other Department transportation activities. 
Commenters expressed concern over coordinating the diverse shipping campaigns of the Department in a
timely manner.  Supporting this option, one commenter noted that the fewer points-of-contact between the
Department and stakeholders would be beneficial.
<p><em>
</em>Establish an OCRWM grant program
<p>
Many commenters saw this as the best option, listing such benefits as minimizing bureaucracy and
administration and increasing flexibility.   Some commented on the benefit of distributing Section 180(c)
assistance without involving other programs as would happen through a Department-wide grant program. 
Others noted that an OCRWM grant program would more easily adjust to the diversity and number of
recipient jurisdictions and thus, Department control and accountability would be easier.
<p>
The Western Interstate Energy Board commented on this option favorably, provided that such a grant
program incorporates flexibility to allow states to coordinate the training and funding. The Southern States
Energy Board and the National Conference of State Legislatures both identified this option as favorable if
additional national or regional coordination efforts were also supported.
<p>
Many county commenters interpreted this option as similar to the direct payments made to local
governments through Yucca Mountain oversight programs. They were generally in favor of options that
assist local governments as directly as possible.
<p>
<em>Use elements from the previous four groups</em>
<p>
Three commenters agreed that a combination of options would be best because it could provide the proper
degree of direct contact between the Department and recipient governments while encouraging national or
regional planning, coordination, and uniformity.  The Council of State Governments--Midwestern Office
said the Department should negotiate with the recipients to provide assistance through a variety of
mechanisms "to accommodate the needs of as many states and tribes as possible."  Commonwealth Edison
Company concurred with the Council of State Government's opinion.  The Southern States Energy Board
recommended using a combination of direct grants to states and tribes with cooperative agreements to
regional organizations to provide coordination and consultation.  
<p> 
<em>Response</em>
<p>
This proposal recommends distributing funds through an OCRWM grants program because the
Department believes this is the most flexible, least administratively burdensome and least costly method of
all the procedural options investigated.  This mechanism will allow the greatest amount of appropriated
funds to be distributed directly to the recipients rather than diverted to cover administrative costs. 
Distributing the funds through a grant program rather than a cooperative agreement program lowers the
cost of administration for both recipients and the Department, and gives the recipients more discretion in
use of the funds.  Under the proposed policy, recipients would have a great deal of flexibility in use of the
grants and could account for varying levels of preparedness.  
<p>
The Department did not choose to implement Section 180(c) through another Federal program for many of
the same reasons commenters were critical of this option.  While the FEMA option may have been flexible
enough to meet the requirements of a Section 180(c) program, the time and effort to set up a program at
another agency would have increased administrative cost, decreased the program's flexibility and reduced
the funds available for recipients.  Since the Department can perform the same function, there is no reason
to involve another agency.  The Department of Transportation programs were not similar enough to the
requirements for a Section 180(c) program and would have required significant effort to meld the programs
together.
<p>
A Department-wide grants program would require overcoming difficult legal and logistical problems.  The
logistical problems of creating one Department-wide emergency response and safe routine transportation
grants program for all eligible recipients would require extensive administrative work.  It would also likely
create legal and procedural paperwork tangles to keep from mingling the appropriations for various
programs within the Department.  As long as the various Department offices cooperate on an informal
basis, there appears to be little benefit to formally combining programs.  
<p>
Combining elements of each option was not selected because it would create logistic difficulties and would
not be very efficient or cost effective.  For example, if the Department sent some recipients' assistance
through the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act program, some through FEMA, and some directly
from the Department, it would significantly increase the administrative costs, increase oversight and
accountability problems and create a very confusing and disjointed program for both the Department and
the recipients.  
<p>
<strong>C. Applicability of Section 180(c) to Private Shipments</strong>
<p>
Many states, counties, and regional groups urged that the Section 180(c) program should apply to all
commercial spent nuclear fuel or defense high-level radioactive waste shipments ultimately destined for an
NWPA facility, whether or not those shipments are transported to and stored on an interim basis at a
private facility.  Commenters cited that any large-scale shipping campaign of such materials will have
virtually the same impact on states and tribes as that envisioned in the NWPA.
<p>
<em>Response</em>
<p>
The Department is currently authorized to implement the Section 180(c) program of financial and technical
assistance only for shipments to a repository or MRS constructed under the NWPA. However, the many
comments on this issue have been noted.
<p>
<strong>D. Policy Development Process</strong>
<p>
A few commenters questioned the Department's plans to issue a Notice of Policy and Procedures rather
than establish the program in regulations.  They voiced concern that implementation of Section 180(c)
through regulations is necessary to ensure stability through changes of leadership within the Department
and that an interpretation of policy and procedures is "less robust."  An expedited rulemaking process was
suggested to accommodate time constraints.
<p>
<em>Response</em>
<p>
The Department is developing the Policy and Procedures after receipt and consideration of extensive
public comments.  At some future date, the Department may decide to promulgate regulations.  At this
time, however, it is the Department's intent to remain flexible in order to work through unforeseen
problems without committing to binding regulations.
<p>
<strong>V.  Conclusion and Request for Submission</strong>
<p>
This paper has presented the Department's proposal for a policy and procedures for the Section 180(c)
program.  It has also presented the Department's summarization of and response to comments received on
prior Notices of Inquiry about  Section 180(c) policy and procedures.  Comments on this proposal will be
included in the Notice of Final Policy and Procedures, which the Department intends to publish in 1997. 
The purpose of this document has been to share with stakeholders the progress to date on developing
Section 180(c) policy and procedures and to request additional comments from interested parties.  The
final policy and procedures may reflect changes as a result of comments, new Congressional direction, and
any policy changes caused by the new Congressional direction. 
<p>
The Department solicits comments from the public on this proposal to issue Section 180(c) policy and
procedures.
<p>

Issued in Washington, D.C., on May 16, 1996
<p><p><p>
Daniel A. Dreyfus,<br>
Director, Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management.<br><p>
<U>FRN</U> VOL.61, NO.96, pp.24772-24783
 <hr>

<h4>                          Appendix
<p>
                   Basis for Cost of Program</h4>
<p>
To determine the cost of the program and a feasible approach to allocate funding among eligible
participants, the Department intends to estimate reasonable activities that could be achieved each year to
use, not as prescribed activities for the applicants, but to determine the dollar amount of the grant each
recipient should receive.   Since the Department has found no industry or regulatory standards on what
constitutes a sufficient emergency response to a spent fuel transportation accident, it expects to rely on
training standards and regulations (discussed below) to reach conclusions about what type of training
would be reasonable.  To reach conclusions with regard to which and how many people should be trained
and to what levels, the Department intends to look at industry regulations, the Department's own
capabilities to support state and tribal governments, and the comments provided by stakeholders.  Based on
the information from these sources, the Department intends to determine the activities on which it would
base its grant allocations and then estimate the costs for these activities.
<p>
The training standards the Department intends to use for emergency response are consistent with the level
of training recommended by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (Safety Series No. 87,
1988), the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) (29 CFR 1910.120) and the National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) (NFPA 471 and 472).  The training standards we intend to use for safe
routine transportation are consistent with current practices and the regulatory limitations placed on states
and tribes for safe routine transportation activities.   Recognizing that not everyone will agree with this
application of the standards to the training goals, there would be few limitations on how the recipient
actually spends its budget, as long as they are used for training related to safe routine transportation of
spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste and emergency response procedures.
<p>
The training goals for both safe routine transportation and emergency response procedures that the
Department intends to use as a basis for determining a grant allocation are as follows:
<p>
<em>Emergency Response </em>
 <ul><li> First-on-scene and first responder personnel:  Self-directed awareness training material would be
  supplied by the Department.  The Department-provided awareness material would include information
  for medical personnel.  Up to two people from each state or tribe would be funded to attend train-the-trainer classes of the jurisdiction's choice to teach the classroom awareness training to first-responders. 
  Section 180(c) funding would partially offset the cost of in-state training.
<p>
<li>  State/tribal hazardous materials or radiological response:  Up to three people would receive funding to
  attend more specialized training, selected by the jurisdiction.  Additional personnel may be trained,
  depending on route miles.
<p>
<li>  Transportation Public Information:  Another one person from each state or tribe would be funded to
  attend public information training (such as that offered at the Nevada Test Site [NTS]).
</ul><p>
<em>Safe Routine Transportation </em>
<ul><li>  State/tribal inspectors for highway and rail:  In addition to the funding for emergency response
  activities, up to three inspectors from each state or tribe may be funded to attend training of their
  choice in either rail or highway inspection procedures.  Jurisdictions without an inspection program
  may use the funds to coordinate observation of another jurisdiction's inspection.  Rail inspections may
  be limited because of legal restrictions on inspecting rail shipments for both states and tribes.  Funding
  may be used to coordinate observation of other agencies' inspection of the shipments, including the
  Department of Transportation's Federal Railroad Administration's (FRA), the Nuclear Regulatory
  Commission's (NRC), the Department of Energy's or the state of origin's inspections of both highway
  and rail shipments and to coordinate with rail and trucking companies on safety and inspection issues.
<p>
Along with the training activities described above, the Department intends to provide funding to cover
some planning and coordination costs, as estimated below.
<p>
If an eligible jurisdiction takes the training activities described above and the method of estimating the
costs for these activities (the Department did not actually attach dollar figures to these activities in this
proposal), it could estimate how much assistance it would be eligible for each year.  However, the
Department is proposing some time restrictions on the funding.  These would be as follows:
<p>
Within the first year of eligibility to receive funding (Transportation Year [defined as the year that
shipments will commence] minus 3 or TY-3): A base grant would be available to help offset planning and
coordination costs.
<p>
Within the second year of eligibility (Transportation Year minus 2 or TY-2): A base grant would be
available to help offset estimated travel and tuition costs to send personnel to train-the trainer training,
emergency response training, and planning and coordination activities.  A variable amount of budget
would be available, for those jurisdictions that qualify, to train additional emergency response personnel. 
Proposed routes would be announced during the second year of eligibility.
<p>
Within the third year of eligibility (Transportation Year minus 1or TY-1): The base grant would be
available to offset estimated travel and tuition costs to train transportation public information staff,
inspectors, three trips for the awareness trainers to train local responders, and planning and coordination
activities.  A variable amount of money, if a jurisdiction qualifies, would be available to help offset
estimated travel and tuition costs to train additional emergency response personnel, if necessary.  The
Department would send out self-taught awareness packages to states and tribes to distribute to first-on-scene and first responder personnel. 
<p>
Within the Transportation Year (TY): Two-thirds of the budget provided in TY-1 would help offset
refresher and new personnel training.   The two-thirds multiplier is derived from a conservative estimate
that after the initial training in TY-1 and TY-2, each jurisdiction would experience a personnel turnover
rate of approximately two-thirds of their staff each year.
<p>
The information below describes the assumptions that the Department intends to use to form cost estimates
for the Department's annual allocations to recipients.
<p>
<strong>The Base Amount</strong>
<p>
<strong>Planning and Coordination Costs -- </strong>The Department intends to make these estimates by taking the
estimated salary of a health physicist employed full-time by a state government and providing a percentage
of that salary.  The salary estimate can be made either by using a Conference of Radiation Control Program
Directors' salary quote or by sampling health physicist salaries in various states and taking the average of
the sample.  One planning and coordination trip would also be estimated in this cost (see travel costs for
the cost estimate of this trip). 
<p>
<strong>Travel Costs --</strong> Planning and coordination trips would be estimated to last three days.  Travel for
hazardous materials responder, inspector, train-the-trainer, and public communications training would be
estimated to last five days.  In-state awareness training would be estimated to last five days and include
planning and coordination costs.  Air travel cost would be estimated by calculating the average airfare from
several locations around the country to the NTS and Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
training centers.  Per diem costs would be estimated by using the Federal government's per diem costs for
the NTS and FEMA training locations.
<p>
<strong>Tuition Costs -- </strong>Tuition costs would be estimated by taking the estimated cost to the DOE of an NTS
Radiological Emergency Operations course and dividing it by 25 students per class.  This tuition cost
would be applied to each trainee in a hazardous materials emergency response, inspector and train-the-trainer class. 
<p>
The base amount of money would be determined from these cost estimates of the training activities
described above.
<p>
<strong>The Variable Amount</strong>
<p>
To determine the variable amount of money, each eligible jurisdiction would receive funds to train three
additional hazardous materials personnel for every 160 miles along a route.  If routes through a jurisdiction
intersect, or are less than 80 miles apart, the route miles could not be double-counted if they fall within an
80 mile radius of another route.  
<p>
The Department intends to provide a variable amount of funding based on route miles because it believes
that it is the best measure to capture any variation in impact on a jurisdiction's ability to prepare for
NWPA shipments.  The 160 mile estimate was used because other emergency response organizations have
used a two-hour response time as the limit to how frequently hazardous materials response teams should be
placed.  From the two-hour measure, one can conservatively say it would take an emergency response
vehicle an hour to travel 80 miles in either direction. 

</body></html>
</DOC>