
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B15-134</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA018-000197-B015-292</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.rw.doe.gov:80/spc_tst/ddnrc196.htm 204.4.196.7 19970106213446 text/html 65946
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Mon, 06 Jan 1997 21:33:30 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Mon, 19 Feb 1996 17:55:23 GMT
Content-length: 65771
</DOCHDR>
<html><head><h3><pre>			Statement for the Record
	     Presentation to the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission
	Status of the Civilian Radioactive Waste Management Program
				 By
		       Daniel A. Dreyfus, Director
	     Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management
		     U.S. Department of Energy
                       	   January 30, 1996</head></h3></pre>
<p><body><h4>
<a href="nrcpics.htm">Click here to view the photographs shown during Dr. Dreyfus' presentation.</a>
<p>
<b>Introduction </b>
<p>
Chairman Jackson and Commissioner Rogers:
<p>
A lot has happened since I last spoke with you in June of last year regarding the Civilian
Radioactive Waste Management Program.  We are now four months into the new fiscal year,
operating under a reduced budget that required us to restructure our geologic disposal program
and to terminate a large portion of our waste acceptance activities.  We are, as yet, without
agreement between the Administration and Congress on new policy direction on our role in the
near-term management of spent nuclear fuel.  Congress is continuing to consider legislation to
initiate construction of an interim storage facility.  If such legislation is enacted, we will need to
further redirect our program.
<p>
To the best of my ability at this point, I will share with you our planning for the future of
the program, considering the funding and the direction the Congress has provided through the
appropriations bill enacted for the current fiscal year.  I will also discuss our contingency
planning in the event that the Administration and Congress agree on new policy direction for
interim storage.
<p>
<u>Fiscal Year 1995 Accomplishments</u>
<p>
In my briefing to you in December 1994, I outlined our targets for implementing the
program approach, which was described in the Program Plan we issued that same month.  At that
time, I noted the importance of gaining agreement by Congress to the 40 per cent increase in
funding requested by the Administration for fiscal year 1995.  The program approach was
endorsed by Congress as a basis for 1995 funding.  It also was generally supported by the
Commission and other program stakeholders.
<p>
Almost all of the increase in funding for fiscal year 1995 was allocated to, and utilized by
the Yucca Mountain Project, which completed the fiscal year with very little carry over and with
accomplishments that often exceeded our targets.  For example, we overcame startup difficulties
in tunneling and made important progress constructing the exploratory studies facility.  Since
December 1994, the tunnel boring machine has excavated over 3,800 meters (over 12,000 feet)
into Yucca Mountain, well ahead of schedule.  The machine is currently operating within the
proposed repository formation.  It has passed the location where the thermal testing alcove will
be constructed and will soon reach the location of the first planned alcove to access the Ghost
Dance Fault.  Progress has permitted our scientists and engineers to begin direct observation and
testing of subsurface geologic and hydrologic conditions, and studies of the engineering
properties of the rock and its response to construction activities.  This information has enhanced,
and to a significant degree confirmed, our understanding of site conditions.  We made similar
progress in other scientific activities and we also initiated the process for development of the
repository environmental impact statement, publishing a Notice of Intent in August and
completing the comment period in December 1995.
<p>
The Office of Waste Acceptance, Storage, and Transportation also made considerable
progress over the past year toward the goals established in the Program Plan.  The scoping
process for the environmental impact statement for a multi-purpose canister system was
completed in January 1995 and the Implementation Plan was issued in August.  The contract for
design and certification of the multi-purpose canister system was issued to Westinghouse
Government and Environmental Services Company in April 1995.  The contract includes three
phases, of which the first - system design and preparation of safety analysis reports - is scheduled
for completion by April.
<p>
<u>Fiscal Year 1996 Funding Situation</u>
<p>
Unfortunately, the decisions made by the Congress in the fiscal year 1996 appropriations
process have made it impossible for us to continue with the program approach.  The Energy and
Water appropriation bill that was enacted provided only $400 million for the program and,
furthermore, froze $85 million of that amount pending the possible future enactment of interim
storage authority.  The result is a program funding level of $315 million, only half of the $630
million we requested for fiscal year 1996 to implement our Program Plan, and 40 per cent below
our fiscal year 1995 level of effort.  The program approach is no longer sustainable at this
funding level and we are adjusting the program to meet our legal responsibilities.
<p>
We have proceeded to reduce our expenditure level to the degree necessary to conform to
the fiscal year 1996 budget of $315 million.  Based on the expectation of a $400 million budget,
we took action in September 1995 to eliminate about 875 contractor jobs over this fiscal year,
primarily within the Yucca Mountain project.  In November, we further reduced the program to
reflect the unexpected loss of another $85 million.  This resulted in the elimination of over 200
additional contractor jobs.  These latest reductions primarily affected the work of our Office of
Waste Acceptance, Storage and Transportation, and our Program Management functions.  As we
took these actions we tried, within our existing authorities, to preserve vital program activities.
<p>
<u>New Program Outlook</u>
<p>
In the early stages of the recent policy debate, the Congress seriously considered
terminating the geologic disposal program.  As the debate evolved, however, political and
practical considerations about the consequences of abandoning geologic disposal gave way to a
more rational and prudent approach.  The Commission's testimony supporting continued
progress toward development of a geologic repository undoubtedly helped.  Congress has
continued to fund the disposal program, but at a much lower level than the President's budget
request for fiscal year 1996.
<p>
The Congress recognized that, because of the significant reduction in funding, a much
reduced repository program would be required.  The Conference Report directed that the reduced
scope should focus on the core scientific activities at Yucca Mountain and that preparation and
submittal of a license application to the Commission should be deferred.  As a result, the target
dates in our program approach for the construction of a geologic repository and for emplacing
waste underground also have been deferred.  What new targets are possible and practicable will
depend upon the expectations for future funding of the program.
<p>
As directed by Congress, we have refocused the repository program on addressing the
major unresolved technical questions regarding the conceptual design of the repository and its
expected performance in the geologic setting.  Consistent with this guidance, we have defined a
new milestone for the Yucca Mountain Project in the form of a specific set of deliverables that
contribute to a "viability assessment."  This work will resolve the critical current uncertainties
and provide the requisite information for a determination in 1998 of the viability of continuing
with actions leading to the licensing of a geologic repository at the Yucca Mountain site.
<p>
With appropriate policy and reasonable funding support, we can regain a license
application target, but at a later date than anticipated.  We will continue to implement our quality
assurance program in a manner that is consistent with available resources, however, further
submittals of revisions to the repository license application annotated outline and work on the
licensing support system can not be sustained.  Expectations regarding various forms of
interaction and information exchange between our staffs are not likely to be met in the reduced
funding situation.
<p>
National policy for the near-term management of spent nuclear fuel is also being
considered in the Congress, but there has been no resolution of the issue as yet.  With severely
limited funds, and in the absence of agreement between the Administration and Congress on new
policy direction, we are trying to maintain our ability to respond to this new direction, to the
extent that our limited resources permit.
<p>
The drastic curtailment in funding for fiscal year 1996 has made it necessary for us to
terminate most of our waste acceptance, canister development, and generic transportation work. 
We will not proceed with certification of the multi-purpose canister system once the safety
analysis report design phase is completed.  All related activities, including our involvement in the
preparation of the environmental impact statement, will also be terminated.  Continued work on
development and certification of legal-weight truck casks for transportation of spent fuel can not
be supported.  We also can not sustain our dialog with interested parties on transportation issues
at the same level as last year.  Our cooperative agreements will be funded at substantially reduced
levels.
<p>
We will continue to pursue our interactions with your staff on burnup credit.  We will
also undertake contingency planning to maintain our ability to respond aggressively should we
get agreement between the Administration and Congress on new policy direction regarding
interim storage. 
<p>
<b>Disposal</b>
<p>
The Administration remains committed to geologic disposal.  The issue that confronted
us in our planning for this fiscal year was whether the program can sustain meaningful progress
toward a future decision on geologic disposal with a funding profile that is significantly below
that required for the program approach described in the Program Plan.  The target dates that we
had aspired to in our program approach for the submittal of a license application to construct a
geologic repository and for emplacing waste underground had to be deferred, of course, as the
Congress acknowledged.  What new targets are possible and practicable will depend upon the
policy and regulatory framework within which the program must operate and expectations for
future funding, up to and beyond 1998.  In planning this program, I am reluctant to assume that
we will receive future funding levels that are inconsistent with the current outlook.  Such
optimistic assumptions of large future increases in annual funding have been a major factor in
discrediting the program in past years.
<p>
Although the focus of our activities has changed, we must not jeopardize our ability
eventually to go forward with licensing.  We will maintain our programs for quality assurance
and technical data management at appropriate levels, consistent with available resources.  I
believe that the Department and the Commission must both rethink their roles, and work together
to define the purpose and nature of their interactions in this changing environment.
<p>
<u>Viability Assessment</u>
<p>
Given the funding for fiscal year 1996 and the likely scenario for the foreseeable future,
the only practical approach is to concentrate the repository effort on the major unresolved
technical questions that must be answered to complete the conceptual design of the repository
and to describe its expected performance in the geologic setting.  Indeed, this is the instruction
given to us in the Conference Report accompanying the Appropriations Act.  In order to manage
the program, as well as to explain and justify the continuing activity to its stakeholders, we have
defined a specific set of deliverables, consistent with the Congressional guidance we received. 
These deliverables will include the following:
<p>
     <li>a package of more specific design work on the critical elements of the repository and the
     waste package, including a concept of operations that identifies available technologies to
     accomplish the objectives of geologic disposal;
<p>
     <li>a total system performance assessment, based upon this design concept and the data
     available to us, which will describe the probable behavior of the repository;
<p>
     <li>a plan and cost estimate for the remaining work required to complete a license
     application; and
<p>
     <li>an estimate of the costs to construct and operate the repository.
<p>
These deliverables, when completed, will provide a better understanding of the
repository design and its performance in the geologic setting, a better appreciation of the
remaining work needed to prepare a license application, and a more precise estimate of the cost
of a repository.  The completion of these deliverables constitutes a logical convergence point at
which we can make a measurably improved judgement of the prospects for geologic disposal at
the Yucca Mountain site and present this information to the Administration and Congress.  We
have characterized this convergence point as a "viability assessment."
<p>
This viability assessment is not the same as the technical site suitability evaluation that
was a target in our program approach and that I have discussed with the Commission previously. 
Our technical site suitability evaluation was based on making a sequence of  higher-level findings
for the qualifying and disqualifying conditions of our siting guidelines, 10 CFR Part 960.  In
making these findings we would have followed the process for evaluating site suitability that we
finalized in December 1994.  The funding we can now expect will not support that process.  The
viability assessment is a management target and its technical components do not correspond to
the siting guidelines in 10 CFR Part 960.  The deliverables that contribute to this assessment are
intended to clarify the most uncertain aspects of geologic disposal at Yucca Mountain.  If the
judgment on the viability of geologic disposal at Yucca Mountain is positive, the components
that contributed to this judgment also will contribute to the requirements for a Secretarial
recommendation to the President, and, subsequently, to a license application to this Commission. 
The assessment will not be sufficient for, nor will it prejudice, these subsequent formal actions
by the Department.
<p>
In order to complete the deliverables we have defined, we must document our
understanding of site conditions, incorporating the data already collected and the new
information being gained from the exploratory studies facility.  We must also have sufficient
understanding of the critical factors affecting our waste containment and isolation strategy to
select the technologies to be used and to gain confidence that geologic disposal at Yucca
Mountain is technically feasible.  In addition, we will need to address cross-cutting design issues,
such as use of backfill, criticality control, and thermal loading. 
<p>
We anticipate completing the deliverables that contribute to the viability assessment by
1998, or sooner, if possible.  Completion of the deliverables by 1998 will be possible because we
can rely upon the large amount of information already collected on site conditions, the progress
already made on the advanced conceptual designs for the repository and waste package, and the
understanding gained from the latest in our series of iterative total-system performance
assessments.  This year, we are compiling the information we have collected to document our
current understanding of the site.  This information will support the additional design work
needed in certain critical areas and the next planned assessment of the expected performance of
our design concepts in the geologic setting.
<p>
We will develop a revised program plan over the next few months, consistent with the
fiscal year 1997 budget cycle.  We will describe our reconfigured program to the Commission as
our plans develop.
<p>
<u>Waste Containment and Isolation Strategy</u>
<p>
We have been refining and documenting our waste containment and isolation strategy for
the Yucca Mountain site over the past year.  When complete, it will reflect our acquired
knowledge of the site and its natural barriers, as well as the likely influence of site conditions on
the performance of potential engineered barriers.  The strategy focuses on two technical
objectives:  first, to limit the annual dose to members of the general public following permanent
closure of the repository; and second, to provide total containment of the waste within the
emplaced waste packages for thousands of years, during the period of highest radionuclide
inventory and temperature.
<p>
A general description of this strategy was included in our Program Plan in December
1994.  During the past year, as we refined the strategy, we provided status briefings to your staff,
the Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste, and the Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board.  In
these briefings, we discussed the elements of our strategy and the links to our testing program. 
Feedback from your staff on our strategy would be welcomed.
<p>
The essence of our strategy is the articulation of specific working hypotheses as testable
bases for assessing how a waste isolation system at Yucca Mountain will perform.  These
hypotheses were developed based on the information already collected.  The working hypotheses
relate to specific hydrologic attributes of the natural system, as well as to specific physical
characteristics of materials that may be part of the engineered system, and the important
interactions between the natural and engineered systems, so that we can design the engineered
enhancements that provide defense-in-depth.  Taken separately, the hypotheses provide the bases
for organizing, managing, and explaining the rationale for our work.  Taken together, the
hypotheses comprise a structure for the assessment of the waste isolation capability of a
repository at Yucca Mountain.
<p>
The strategy enables us to concentrate our efforts on a more limited testing program to
answer questions about a small number of specific hypotheses that may be crucial to the viability
assessment.  In the longer-term, we hope to use the strategy to help us define the critical work
that remains to be done to enable us to complete a license application.
<p>
<u>Repository and Waste Package Design</u>
<p>
The goal of the repository advanced conceptual design phase has been modified from that
which we had originally envisioned under our program approach.  Given the likely funding
profile and the need to provide design information to support the viability assessment, our plan
for fiscal year 1996 is to document the current conceptual level of detail for the repository design. 
This will provide us with a reference design, or a benchmark, based on the work performed to
date.  A summary report on the repository advanced conceptual design is being prepared by our
Management and Operations Contractor and will be submitted to the Yucca Mountain Site
Characterization Office in March.  This report will identify those areas of the design requiring
further refinement.   This report will also facilitate a review of the current design concept against
the design and safety requirements. 
<p>
In the next phase, selected aspects of the design will be advanced to resolve key issues
that will allow us to demonstrate that the construction, operation, and closure of the repository
are technically feasible.  The design information we compile over the next few years will be the
basis for our assessment of the expected performance of the system in terms of radiological
safety and waste isolation.  Outputs of this design phase will also support the evaluation of the
additional design work that may be needed to support our license application for construction of
a repository.  It will also support preparation of an updated cost estimate for construction and
operation of a repository.
<p>
<u>Thermal Loading </u>
<p>
We must have sufficient understanding of thermal loading issues to define our concepts
for the repository and waste package, to evaluate the performance and environmental
consequences of these concepts in the geologic setting, and to estimate the costs associated with
construction and operation of the repository.  Our approach toward selecting a thermal load must
take into account the required size and capacity of the proposed repository and the cost implied
by the design.  The imperatives associated with capacity and cost have been re-emphasized in the
debate occurring in Congress on the future direction and funding for the program.   
<p>
We are currently considering a range of design thermal loads that will accommodate at
least the full statutory capacity of a single repository.  This approach is consistent with our
understanding of currently available information and meets the broad objectives of our program. 
Our assessment will be based on a design concept and associated thermal loading that is
supported by the information available at the time.  We will continue to examine alternative
thermal loadings.  We will maintain design and operational flexibility in our design concept to
accommodate new information. 
<p>
<u>Long Term Criticality</u>
<p>
Criticality control for the period following closure of the repository must also be
addressed.  The  Department, as part of its efforts to demonstrate compliance with the
Commission's criticality control requirements for any material being considered for disposal, will
carefully evaluate the risks of potential criticality events in order to ensure the protection of the
health and safety of the public.  Our topical report on partial burnup credit, which we submitted
in May 1995, is intended to initiate consideration by your staff of burnup credit as one element of
a disposal criticality control strategy.  Our near-term objective is to gain sufficient confidence in
our approach to support our design activities.
<p>
<u>Performance Assessment</u>
<p>
Our latest assessment of the performance of a repository at the Yucca Mountain site was
completed in late 1995.  This iteration evaluated the performance of the repository without
incorporating the effects of disruptive events such as volcanism and fault displacement.  Earlier
analyses showed that disruptive events do not appreciably affect the calculated results.  Periodic
climate changes, however, were included in the analyses in terms of potential changes in both
infiltration rate and water table elevation.  The latest assessment utilized more representative
conceptual models of the site.  More importantly, it also incorporated more realistic models for
the behavior of the engineered system.
<p>
Two system-level performance measures were evaluated.  The cumulative radionuclide
releases from the repository were calculated for 10,000 years.  The peak doses resulting from
radionuclide releases were calculated over hundreds of thousands of years.  The results indicate
that the engineered barriers could provide containment and contribute to waste isolation for
extended periods.   The results also indicate that, under certain assumptions, the natural system
by itself can contribute to isolation of the radionuclides for a very long time-period.  The analyses
tend to confirm our understanding of the importance of the rate and distribution of ground-water
movement to the performance of the natural system.  
<p>
A combination of waste package and site performance can be shown to contribute to
containing and isolating radioactive wastes within the Yucca Mountain area for some tens to
even hundreds of thousands of years.  When the period of concern is extended up to 1,000,000
years, only a few factors dominate the calculated response.  In addition, only a few, long-lived
radionuclides contribute significantly to this response.  Our results indicate that the very long-term peak release-rate and the peak dose are affected predominately by dispersion and dilution
processes.  For example, hydrologic conditions that limit transport to diffusion-controlled
processes can delay releases from the engineered barrier system and significantly reduce the peak
release rate.  In addition, the peak dose resulting from these releases is significantly affected by
dilution and dispersion in the underlying aquifer.  Our waste containment and isolation strategy
reflects this understanding of the factors that affect long-term performance, as well as
recognizing the importance of those factors that ensure complete containment of radionuclides
during the early time period when the radionuclide inventory is highest.
<p>
Our next assessment of system performance, which is being scheduled for the 1997-1998
time-frame, will be based more directly on the process-level models that we are developing for
the site and engineered system.  A more sophisticated biosphere model is also expected to be in
place to allow calculation of dose and the associated risk to a representative individual in an
affected population.  The objective for this assessment is to evaluate both the expected
performance of the system and its performance under conditions imposed by potentially
disruptive events, considering appropriate ranges of probabilities of occurrence and of
consequences.
<p>
The 1997-1998 assessment will consider and reflect the site and engineered system
process-level understanding and data available at that time, and will therefore represent the best
estimate of system performance we are likely to have for some time to come.  Because our 1995
assessment used site and design information that is not expected to change drastically, however,
the results from the 1997-1998 assessment will likely indicate better performance, with lower
releases and doses than the 1995 analysis, but not "orders of magnitude" better.  Uncertainties
will continue to exist in the characterization of both engineered component and natural system
processes.  These uncertainties will be reflected in the alternate conceptual models and parameter
distributions that are considered in the analyses.
<p>
We understand that your staff will continue to conduct iterative performance assessments
to help integrate their review across technical areas and to assist in identifying the critical
technical issues for licensing.  We received the report on your latest iterative performance
assessment results and are reviewing it.  We will keep the staff informed as to the progress of our
assessment and welcome comments on our results.  It would facilitate potential future licensing
activity if our approaches to performance assessment were generally consistent, and if we were to
be in general agreement on the key technical issues and uncertainties.  We met with your staff in
November 1995 to exchange views on the key technical issues.  Another meeting is scheduled at
the end of February to discuss the progress we have made in our respective performance
assessment activities.
<p>
<u>Understanding of Site Conditions</u>
<p>
We will not attempt to resolve all issues concerning site conditions during the next few
years.  We will, however, seek to define and understand them well enough that a measurably
improved judgement can be made on the feasibility of repository development at Yucca
Mountain.  This understanding will also enable us to define a defensible set of studies and tests
to resolve the issues remaining for licensing.
<p>
  <u>   Exploratory Studies Facility</u>
<p>     
Our tunnel boring machine (TBM) operations have advanced significantly, exceeding our
fiscal year 1995 milestones.  As of January 18, 1996, the TBM had excavated 3,895 meters
(almost 12,800 feet) into Yucca Mountain, well ahead of schedule.  Four underground test
alcoves have been completed, and sampling and hydrologic testing are underway.  The machine
is currently operating within the proposed repository formation.  It has passed the location where
the thermal testing alcove will be constructed and will soon reach the location of the first planned
alcove to access the Ghost Dance Fault.  We expect to complete the separate excavation by July
that eventually will allow us access to the Ghost Dance Fault itself.  Construction of the alcove
that will be used for thermal testing is expected to be complete by September.  The first in situ
heater test is scheduled to begin in December 1996. 
<p>
Our progress into the mountain over the past year has permitted our scientists and
engineers to begin direct observation and testing of subsurface geologic and hydrologic
conditions, and studies of the engineering properties of the rock and its response to construction
activities.  This information enhanced, and to some degree confirmed, our understanding of site
conditions.  For example, we have yet to observe any water dripping or flowing into the
excavation, even in fractured or faulted zones, or any zones of perched water.  This is consistent
with our hypothesis regarding the character of ground-water flow in the unsaturated rock at
Yucca Mountain.   Information on rock properties and their response to construction enhanced
our understanding of the construction outlook and aided our design of the exploratory studies
facility and the repository.  The rock at the repository level is, in fact, better than we had
anticipated and easier to mine.  We have confirmed our general understanding of the three
dimensional geology and structure at the north end of the repository block, increasing our
confidence in our ability to model subsurface conditions.  No unexpected features, such as major
new faults were observed.  In addition, we found that the Drill Hole Wash structure,  identified at
the surface as a fault several tens of meters wide, is a less significant feature at repository depth
than expected and is unlikely to be a preferential pathway for water movement.  These
observations led to elimination of the need for a planned test alcove.
<p>
Installation of the conveyor system in July 1995 allowed us to replace the muck cars used
during the early phase of construction and, in combination with an aggressive management
strategy that consolidates outages and minimizes TBM downtime, has helped to increase the rate
of progress and reduce the unit cost of construction significantly.  Our aggressive approach to
construction management is being continued into fiscal year 1996.  We expect to complete the
separate excavation that eventually will allow us to access the Ghost Dance Fault itself by July. 
We are looking at opportunities for increasing operating efficiency that could allow us to
continue TBM excavation beyond this point.
<p>
  <u>   Surface-Based Testing</u>
<p>
During fiscal year 1995, we continued to collect information from our surface-based
testing activities, including data on the properties of the rock at depth to support design and
construction of the exploratory studies facility, data on the characteristics of water movement in
the unsaturated and saturated  zones, and data relevant to the evaluation of the waste package 
environment.  We continued to monitor precipitation and meteorological conditions, infiltration
from precipitation events, streamflow and runoff, water levels in wells, and seismicity.  We
analyzed groundwater samples to assess their age and the characteristics of infiltration since
nuclear weapons testing began at the Nevada Test Site.  We also continued our program to
monitor natural infiltration in unsaturated zone boreholes.
<p>
In response to concerns expressed by your staff,  the State of Nevada, and Nye County,
we implemented a program to collect information on the base-line characteristics of pneumatic
flow in Yucca Mountain.  Continuous pneumatic monitoring of selected boreholes, before,
during and after TBM penetration of the non-welded unit of the Paintbrush Tuff, indicates that
Yucca Mountain consists of three distinct pneumatic regimes.  The uppermost regime consists of
the Tiva Canyon welded units, which are extensively fractured, highly interconnected, and show
an immediate response to atmospheric pressure changes.  The Paintbrush Tuff non-welded unit,
which underlies the Tiva Canyon units and overlies the formation in which the repository would
be constructed, shows high matrix water saturations and low fracture density.  Monitoring
indicates that this unit acts as a partial barrier to gas flow, attenuating and delaying response to
atmospheric pressure changes.  This pneumatic data confirms the results from hydrologic
investigations, which indicate that the non-welded unit acts to absorb water infiltrating through
the overlying Tiva Canyon units and to divert it away from the repository horizon.  These results
will be utilized in modeling gas flow in a thermally perturbed repository as part of our next
performance assessment iteration.
<p>
Our results continue to confirm that, consistent with our waste isolation and containment
strategy, the natural system at the site contributes significantly to waste isolation:
<p>
<ul>
<li>precipitation and infiltration are low, and potential evapotranspiration is high;
<p><li>the geologic layer above the repository horizon limits downward movement of water through the repository;
<p><li>most water moves slowly through today's ground-water system;
<p><li>the repository horizon is about 400 meters above today's water table and about 300 meters above the highest water table indicated in the geologic record for Yucca Mountain during the Quaternary period;
<p><li>the mineralogy of rocks underlying repository horizon will slow the movement of radionuclides to the water table; and
<p><li>dilution and dispersion in the aquifer underlying the repository will help limit the doses to members of the public.
</ul>
<p>
Only a few surface-based tests are planned for fiscal year 1996.  Those tests that are
conducted will focus on the hypotheses in our waste containment and isolation strategy.  Testing
at the C-Well complex will continue to obtain data to characterize flow in the saturated zone. 
Monitoring related to characterization of seismicity, meteorological conditions, pneumatic
pathways, and saturated and unsaturated zone hydrology will be continued.
<p>
Attention continues to be focused on the synthesis, analysis, and documentation of the
substantial amount of data collected to date.  Key models of natural processes, including those
for flow and transport in the saturated and unsaturated zones, will be documented and available
by the end of fiscal year 1996.  This documentation will provide input for the design work and
for the next iteration of total system performance assessment that support the viability
assessment.
<p>
<u>Interactions between the Department and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission Related to
Geologic Disposal</u>
<p>
During fiscal year 1995, our funding permitted extensive interactions with your staff.  We
met at more than 30 technical exchanges, technical meetings, bi-monthly exploratory studies
facility meetings, and management meetings.  Our respective staffs have met several times over
the last few months to discuss the general outlook for the disposal program, given the funding
situation for fiscal year 1996 and uncertainty over agreement by the Administration and Congress
on new policy direction.  In October, we briefed your staff on the results of our preliminary
planning for fiscal year 1996 for the Yucca Mountain Project.  At that meeting, we noted that
submittal of a license application has been deferred.  We also noted that our previous mutual
expectations regarding various forms of interaction and information exchange are not likely to be
met because of our reduced staff and funding.  We anticipate that any interactions that do occur
will be smaller, less formal, and rely heavily on the use of videoconference and teleconference
facilities.  We will continue our periodic meetings on the exploratory studies facility.  We are
also committed to continuing our periodic management meetings at which higher-level program
issues can be discussed.
<p>
We recognize that although our focus in the near-term is not on submittal of a license
application, we must keep you and your staff informed and preserve the integrity of the work that
is done so that it can ultimately be used in the licensing process.  We expect that you will provide
us feedback if a significant technical issue is not adequately addressed and if failure to do so
would impair our ability to continue progress toward licensing at some point in the future.  For
planning our activities and reaching program decisions, it is important that we have an adequate
understanding of what the critical issues are and what activities are required to resolve them. 
Resolution of all of these issues in the near term may not be possible.  Rather, we seek to
advance our knowledge of these issues to help define a clearly achievable path forward to their
resolution.
<p>
We intend to keep the Commission and your staff informed of our technical work and
products, and of the evaluations we make.  We believe that our semi-annual Site Characterization
Progress Report is an important vehicle to sustain this communication.  We also suggest that the
Commission's On-Site Representatives assume a greater role in communicating to the
Commission and its staff changes in our disposal program, serving as a focal point and conduit
for questions from the staff.  I believe that we need to work together to define effective means of
communication that are appropriate given the necessary changes in our respective roles.
<p>
<u>Topical Reports and Issue Resolution</u>
<p>
During the past year, we continued to pursue our issue resolution initiative in technical
exchanges and through submittal of topical reports.  We have focused on resolving key issues
and I believe that communications have continued to improve.  The utility of the process for
issue resolution has not yet been reflected in resolved issues;  however, your staff has informed
us that they are committed to work toward resolution of several of the issues that we have been
discussing.  We look forward to formal communications regarding these issues.  We have
resolved 99 of the original 198 open items from your staff's Site Characterization Analysis, 
including 9 since December 1994.  Twenty four items are presently being reviewed by your staff.
<p>
Your staff accepted our first topical report on the assessment of seismic hazards for 
review in fiscal year 1995.  We will be providing responses to questions from your staff on this
report in the near future.  Our second Topical Report on seismic design methodology was
submitted in October 1995 and in December your staff accepted it for review.  We look forward
to your staff's completion of their review of that report.
<p>
<u>Quality Assurance and Design Control</u>
<p>
Significant progress was made in the past year in terms of enhancing the overall
effectiveness of our quality assurance program.  We verified through audits that all affected
organizations are satisfactorily implementing the Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste
Management Quality Assurance Requirements and Description (QARD) document.  The QARD
is the singular document that describes the quality assurance program used by all affected
organizations.
<p>
We realigned the verification function so that the program's Office of Quality Assurance
performs all audits for affected organizations.  This realignment included establishing a process
for implementing a consolidated Qualified Suppliers List and auditing suppliers.  We also
developed a program-wide system for identifying and correcting conditions adverse to quality,
and for performing trend evaluations.  This included establishment of a trend program database.
<p>
We have been engaged for some time in a dialog with your staff about those aspects  of
our quality assurance program that are relevant to design control.   We agree with the
Commission that it is our responsibility to execute a quality assurance program that meets your
requirements.  We will live up to that responsibility.  Even under a reduced budget, we will
implement our quality assurance program to ensure that what we do during the next few years, in
site characterization, and in the design and construction of the exploratory studies facility, is
adequately documented for use in licensing.
<p>
In October 1994, your staff raised concerns regarding our design control process for the
exploratory studies facility.  They questioned the traceability of the applicable requirements from
10 CFR Part 60 into our design products.  Our submittal of the Regulatory Compliance Review
Report in March 1995 was the first step towards addressing these concerns.  This report provided
evaluations of 15 selected 10 CFR Part 60 requirements.  In August 1995, we submitted a
supplement to the March report that presented an evaluation of the balance of applicable 10 CFR
Part 60 requirements.  We also have evaluated our design control process.  We concluded that the
improvements we instituted in early 1995 and those in process ensure proper consideration of the
applicable requirements in the development of the exploratory studies facility design.
<p>
In April of last year, your staff conducted an in-field verification to determine if
acceptable corrective actions had been effectively implemented in our design control process. 
They made three recommendations regarding exploratory studies facility design.  We are
committed to addressing the recommendations and have taken steps to do so.  Your staff was
planning to conduct another in-field verification following its review of the reports that we
submitted in March and August.  Given our reduced resources for the current fiscal year, we
would appreciate the opportunity to discuss the timing and scope of this second in-field
verification before it commences.
<p>
<u>License Application Annotated Outline</u>
<p>
We will not complete Revision 1 of the License Application Annotated Outline in fiscal
year 1996.  The framework and content of the annotated outline will be used as an internal
information management tool to help guide the development of the technical reports, scientific
reports, and design products that we produce to support the viability assessment.  Further
revisions to the annotated outline text are not planned for the foreseeable future.
 <p>
<u>Licensing Support System</u>
<p>
I briefed you in May 1995 on the status of the Licensing Support System.  The substantial
progress we made over the past year in defining the Licensing Support System and in planning
for the development of this system was a direct result of the collaborative participation of your
staff and the stakeholders.  Unfortunately, under the current funding constraints and direction,
further action on the Licensing Support System is deferred until such time as we are better able to
define our plans and schedule for submittal of an application for construction authorization and
Congress authorizes us to proceed.
<p>
<u>Yucca Mountain Standards</u>
<p>
At present, there are no environmental standards for protection of the public from the
radioactive waste that might be disposed of in a geologic repository at the Yucca Mountain site. 
The uncertainty associated with this situation requires some flexibility in defining our strategy
and plans.  The Energy Policy Act of 1992 directed the Environmental Protection Agency to
promulgate new standards for a repository at the Yucca Mountain site based on and consistent
with the recommendations developed by the National Academy of Sciences.  The 1992 law also
directed the Commission to modify its requirements to be consistent with the new standards.
<p>
<u>National Academy of Sciences Report</u>
<p>
The National Academy of Sciences formed the Committee on Technical Bases for Yucca
Mountain Standards to prepare its recommendations to the Environmental Protection Agency. 
The Committee's report was submitted to the Agency in August 1995.
<p>
The Committee's report observes that there are both technical and institutional
dimensions to the development and approval of a geologic repository.  This observation is
consistent with our view, and what we believe is the Commission's view, that science cannot
provide unqualified assurances over many thousands of years.  The ultimate decisions regarding
disposal will involve societal and economic, as well as technical elements.  We believe that the
Committee's report basically reaffirms the feasibility of geologic disposal.  The report also
recognizes that policy makers need to make decisions regarding a number of issues that lack a
definitive scientific basis.  Through its recommendations, the report puts the question of how
society and policy makers should deal with inter-generational equity on the table for discussion.
<p>
The report notes that predictions of human behavior, even for hundreds of years in the
future, have no scientific basis.  At the same time, however, the report goes on to recommend
compliance assessments against quantitative standards for geologic disposal that would apply for
hundreds of thousands of years into the future, to include the peak annual risk, whenever it
occurs.  It is not clear that quantitative predictions for a period of up to one million years can be
defended in a licensing environment, especially if the attendant uncertainties are not explicitly
recognized and the standard is based on a risk limit that is overly conservative in light of these
uncertainties.  A quantitative standard that focuses the licensing debate upon highly speculative
calculations of exposures as much as one million years into the future, it seems to me, is more
likely to obscure than enlighten the societal decision on the acceptability of geologic disposal at
Yucca Mountain.
<p>
In the absence of a scientific basis for predictions about human behavior and the
biosphere as they relate to the evaluation of individual risk in the far future, the Committee
declared that it is really a policy issue.  The Committee suggested that appropriate (but certainly
hypothetical) assumptions for such evaluations should be made, based on current population and
living habits, and incorporated in the rulemaking.  We believe that this approach is
implementable, provided that the required hypothetical assumptions are explicitly defined in the
standard.
<p>
In developing its recommendations, the Committee also made several technical assertions
that should be carefully evaluated during the rulemaking process.  For example, the Committee
concluded that the geologic framework at Yucca Mountain was either geologically stable or was
expected to vary in such a way as to be predictable over a period on the order of a million years. 
We are not certain that it is reasonable to expect that science can demonstrate and that we can
defend that contention in the licensing process as the basis for conclusions about compliance.  In
general, we believe that some of the technical assertions made by the Committee are also
inherently a matter of judgement and will have to be determined by policy decisions at the
appropriate stage in the rulemaking process and stipulated in the standard or the Commission's
implementing regulation.
<p>
Consequently, we believe that great care needs to be taken by the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in addressing the Committee's
recommendations in their subsequent rulemaking actions.  Whatever standard results from this
process must protect public health and safety and the environment.  It must also be
implementable.  That is, demonstrating compliance with the standard should not require a greater
degree of scientific proof than can reasonably be provided and should not leave policy
judgements to be defended in a licensing process as if they were technical judgements supported
by factual analyses. Promulgating a standard that cannot be implemented may result in the de
facto rejection of the Yucca Mountain site, or even a rejection of the option of geologic disposal. 
Such rejection will not avoid the consequences of long-term radioactive waste management, it
will simply require society to resort to a different, and currently undetermined, long-term
approach.
<p>
We are pleased to note that your staff has established a liaison with the Environmental
Protection Agency and a task force to follow the Agency's rulemaking activities.  Since the
Department will ultimately have to demonstrate compliance with whatever standard is
promulgated, we also intend to be very involved in the rulemaking process.  We provided our
comments on the Committee's report and our recommendations to the Environmental Protection
Agency in November 1995.  We will follow the rulemaking process closely and comment when
appropriate.  We believe that the critical policy issues for rulemaking are: 1) the level of risk that
is considered acceptable and whether that level of risk should depend on the time frame;  2) the
time frame for quantitative compliance assessment and demonstration;  3) the definition of the
reference biosphere, including the critical group and exposure scenarios;  and 4) how human
intrusion will be treated.
<p>
<u>Revisiting the Regulatory Basis for Geologic Disposal</u>
<p>
Although Congress has directed that repository licensing activities should be deferred, the
long-range goal of submitting a successful license application to the Commission remains central
to the Program's mission.  We believe that the program should include a plan and target date for
the submittal of a license application.  It is apparent from recent developments, however, that any
such plan must recognize the budgetary realities or it will have little possibility of being
implemented.  
<p>
As you may recall, the Program Approach for the Yucca Mountain Project that we
adopted in fiscal year 1995 reduced the previously projected cost to submittal of a license
application by about $1 billion.  That plan, which we were pursuing in fiscal year 1995, still
contemplated the expenditure of an additional $3.2 billion on Yucca Mountain from fiscal year
1996 through submittal of the license application in 2001.  We are now expecting to spend only
about $1 billion through fiscal year 1998.
<p>
The implication of these numbers is that, based upon the 1995 program approach, the
completion of a license application would entail an additional $2.5 billion of expenditures after
1998, if the cost of extending the schedule is considered.  It is clear to me that the Congress will
be reluctant to provide those resources, even if the outlook from the viability assessment is
promising.  
<p>
It should be possible to move directly and efficiently from the viability assessment to a
license application, if we find that a repository at Yucca Mountain is indeed viable.  Our
objective should be to design a repository that is compatible with the geologic setting and to
develop a safety case to support a proposal to construct that repository.  The licensing process
should then focus on examining the safety case to determine if public health and safety and the
environment are adequately protected. 
<p>
I believe that it is both possible and necessary to revisit the regulatory basis and the
related expectations that have given rise to our earlier work plans.  Most of the scientific factors
central to those work plans have,  or will have, been addressed by 1998.  Testing related to long
term performance can be done as part of the performance confirmation program during
construction and operations, prior to closure of the repository.  Much of the cost subsequent to
1998 is expected to be associated with the documentation, presentation, and defense of the
results.  In my view, that cost can be significantly reduced if the focus of the licensing review is
on the safety case we make for a specific repository design and its predicted performance in the
geologic setting, rather than on a comprehensive evaluation of all possible aspects of the site.
<p>
With a licensing process that concentrates on the adequacy of a specific proposed facility, 
we can aspire to reestablish a target date for a license application soon after the year 2000 at a
sustainable level of funding.  I believe this is the only way the program can command the
resources needed to retain geologic disposal as a national strategy.  We intend to explore this
approach and we are considering the revisions to our regulations that would be needed to clarify
our intentions.  We intend to keep the Congress, our stakeholders and oversight groups, and, of
course, the Commission, advised of our evaluation.
 <p>    
<u>Waste Acceptance, Storage, and Transportation</u>
<p>
We do not yet have new policy direction regarding our role in the near-term management
of spent fuel and we have no access to the $85 million that the Congress set aside for work on an
interim storage facility.  My remarks will be limited, therefore, to the practical considerations of
the major adjustments we had to make to accommodate our funding constraints for this year.  I
will also discuss our contingency plans to maintain the ability to respond should the
Administration and Congress agree on new policy direction.
<p>
<u>Technology Development</u>
<p>
<u>Multi-Purpose Canister System</u>
<p>
The contract to develop the multi-purpose canister system was structured in three phases. 
The first phase of the contract - system design and preparation of safety analysis reports - will be
completed, as scheduled, by April of this year.
<p>
In June 1995, I indicated that we anticipated proceeding with phase two of the contract -
certification and prototype testing - and that applications would be submitted to your staff by
April to support decisions on certification of the multi-purpose canister system for storage and
transportation.  Because of our fiscal year 1996 funding situation, we will not proceed with this
action.
<p>
If the Administration and Congress agree on new policy direction that requires interim
storage to be operational within the next few years, other commercially available technologies
certified by the Commission will have to be utilized.  Private industry may even elect to carry the
design of one or more multi-purpose canister systems forward.
<p>
<u>Multi-Purpose Canister System Environmental Impact Statement</u>
<p>
The scoping process for preparation of the environmental impact statement for a multi-purpose 
canister system was completed in January 1995 and the Implementation Plan was issued
in August.  In response to a comment received from the Navy during the scoping process, the
scope of the environmental impact statement was broadened to include naval as well as civilian
spent nuclear fuel.  Since work on the development of the multi-purpose canister system will not
continue past the design phase, further work on the draft environmental impact statement for the
fabrication and deployment of multi-purpose canisters also has been terminated.  Argonne
National Laboratory, our support contractor for development of the environmental impact
statement, has been directed to complete the preliminary draft document, which will be filed for
future reference. 
<p>
The Navy has decided that it will proceed with that part of the environmental impact
statement covering naval spent nuclear fuel by becoming the lead agency.  The Department will
participate as a cooperating agency.  Since all naval spent fuel is shipped to and stored at Idaho
National Engineering Laboratory, the evaluations will be specific to that location.
<p>
<u>Multi-Purpose Canister - Part 60 Design Considerations Report</u>
<p>
In order to enhance the likelihood that the multi-purpose canister would be found suitable
as a component of the waste package during the repository licensing review, we proposed to your
staff that we develop a technical report that discusses the effects of the use of a multi-purpose
canister on the waste package, the repository environment, and repository operations.  Having
decided not to proceed with submittal of the applications for certification of the multi-purpose
canister system for storage and transportation, we have terminated further work on the Part 60
technical report and will not be submitting it for review by your staff.  We will continue to
interact with your staff on burnup credit as part of our approach for criticality safety, however, as
I will discuss later.
<p>
<u>General Atomics Transportation Casks (GA-4/9)</u>
<p>
The GA-4/9 Legal Weight Truck casks were being developed as part of our overall waste
management system.  The certification process for these two truck casks is underway.  The safety
analysis reports were submitted to the Commission in July and August of 1994.  There are
several major issues that have been discussed between your staff and General Atomics, dealing
with the structural aspects of the design.  Half-scale-model drop tests were completed last month
for the GA-4 cask and initial results indicate that decelerations and strains on the model were
consistent with the analytical predictions.
<p>
We are unable to provide additional funds for the certification of these casks.  We intend
to make this technology available to private industry and they may elect to pursue certification.
<p>
<u>Dry Transfer System</u>
<p>
Over the last few years, we have also been working with the Electric Power Research
Institute on the design of a dry transfer system for spent nuclear fuel.  The system will enable the
transfer of individual spent fuel assemblies between conventional, top-loading casks and canister
systems.  The design of the system is being developed by Transnuclear under a subcontract with
the Electric Power Research Institute.   The proposed design incorporates technology and
experience from the French dry-transfer operations at La Hague and from Federal and
commercial facilities in the United States.
<p>
The Electric Power Research Institute delivered a final design report to the Department in
December 1995 and a draft Topical Safety Analysis Report is expected in February.  We plan to
submit the topical report to your staff later this year for review and acceptance.
<p>
We are currently negotiating with the Idaho Operations Office of the Department's Office
of Environmental Management regarding a cost-shared project to fabricate and demonstrate the
dry transfer system at the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory.  The system could assist the
Department in meeting its near-term spent fuel management commitments to the State of Idaho. 
It could also benefit early operations at any interim storage facility.  Our intent is to begin
fabrication this fiscal year and complete the demonstration by the end of 1997.
<p>
<u>Dry Storage Research</u>
<p>
The program maintains spent nuclear fuel in storage casks at the Idaho National
Engineering Laboratory.  This spent fuel has been in dry storage longer than any other fuel in this
country.  The casks are routinely monitored to provide information regarding the behavior of the
spent fuel in storage and could provide valuable information for licensing by the Commission of
extended dry storage.  This work has been funded from the Civilian Research and Development
appropriation, since the Nuclear Waste Fund cannot be used for generic research.  The
appropriations bill for fiscal year 1996 did not provide funds to continue this activity and we
have asked your staff to consider taking over this project.
<p>
<u>Criticality Safety</u>
<p>
Criticality safety is an important issue that must be addressed in the design and operation
of our integrated nuclear waste management system.  Obtaining appropriate credit for burn up of
fissile material in the spent fuel continues to be a priority for the Department.  The  Department
believes that efficient geologic disposal at a reasonable cost requires consideration of burnup
credit for the design of waste packages.  Burnup credit also allows spent fuel transportation cask
capacities to be maximized, which provides benefits in terms of both reduced public risk and cost
savings.  Considering the large quantity of spent nuclear fuel to be handled by the federal waste
management system, there are substantial incentives for using burnup credit in the design of
storage, transportation, and disposal packages.
<p>
In May 1995, we submitted to your staff a topical report on burnup credit for actinides
only.  In December, we responded to initial comments from your staff.  This first topical report 
provides what we believe is the basis for your acceptance of the use of partial burnup credit.  It 
includes a special cask loading procedure that would provide the assurance necessary for later
consideration of full burnup credit.  We intend to continue our interactions on the use of partial
burnup credit.
<p>
We had intended to continue to gather data and conduct tests and experiments to support
the use of full burnup credit.  Once we had obtained sufficient data, we would have submitted a
second topical report on full burnup credit to your staff.  Under our restructured program, we
have deferred our work to establish the basis for use of full burnup credit until a later date.
<p>
<u>Contingency Plans</u>
<p>
We have done some contingency planning for interim storage to maintain our ability to
respond aggressively should the Administration and Congress agree on new policy direction. 
Our contingency planning has considered development of a market-driven national transportation
capability.  This capability would utilize commercially available transportation and storage
equipment that has been certified by the Commission.  Our contingency planning also considered
non-site specific engineering work and preparation of a Topical Safety Analysis Report that
would be needed if we were to begin the licensing process.
<p>
If Congress and the Administration agree to new policy direction authorizing the
development of a federal interim storage facility at a specific site, the program will aggressively
act on that direction and submit a license application to the Commission at the earliest
practicable date.  We believe that the establishment of the Commission's Spent Fuel Project
Office will facilitate the licensing of such a facility.
<p>
<u>Interactions between the Department and Nuclear Regulatory Commission Related to Federal
Interim Storage</u>
<p>
The level of interactions between the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the
Department regarding interim storage and related topics is expected to increase dramatically if
the Administration and Congress should agree on the policy direction for the development of this
facility.  In the meantime, and under our current funding limitations, we will continue
interactions with the Spent Fuel Project Office on generic issues associated with interim storage.
<p>
The Department understands that the Commission is currently engaged in rulemaking to
update its criteria applicable to new commercial reactors for seismic hazard evaluation and
design in 10 CFR Part 100.  The proposed revisions direct an applicant to provide a probabilistic
seismic hazard evaluation in its safety analysis report.  We believe that 10 CFR Part 72 should be
revised to refer to the new provisions of Part 100, as they would relate to the design of an interim
storage facility, once the rulemaking for Part 100 is complete.
<p>
<b>Conclusion</b>
<p>
I am grateful that the working relationship between our staffs has been strengthened.  In
light of the funding situation for the current fiscal year and the continuing debate in Congress, it
is likely that these relationships will be tested and that both of our organizations will have to
accommodate new and possibly dramatic policy redirection.  At a minimum, we will have to
accommodate the significant change in focus and expectations that will govern the activities of
the repository program for at least the current fiscal year.  We may also have to respond to
intense, near-term licensing interactions undertaken in response to enactment of legislation
providing new policy direction on interim storage.  I hope we can draw upon the experience of
many years and the strength of our organizational relationships to maintain progress toward
development of a geologic repository as we address whatever policy redirection we get.
<p>
Thank you for the opportunity to brief the Commission.  I would be happy to answer any
questions you may have.
</html></h4></body>
</DOC>