
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B14-147</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA075-000494-B041-459</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.privacy.org:80/ipc/s1726.html 199.34.33.146 19970209032817 text/html 19705
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sun, 09 Feb 1997 03:28:24 GMT
Server: Apache/0.8.14
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 19532
Last-modified: Fri, 03 May 1996 17:40:29 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Text of S. 1726</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF">
<BODY>

<H2><CENTER>Text of Pro-CODE Bill: S. 1726</CENTER></H2>

<PRE>


IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES


Mr. BURNS (for himself, Mr. PRESSLER, Mr. LEAHY, Mr.
DOLE, Mr.FAIRCLOTH, Mrs. MURRAY, Mr. McCAIN, Mr.
WYDEN, Mr. ASHCROFT and Mr. NICKLES) introduced the
following bill which was read twice and referred to the
Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation.


                             A BILL

To promote electronic commerce by facilitating the use of 
       strong encryption, and for other purposes.

       Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representa-
tives of the United States of America in Congress assembled.

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

    This Act may be cited as the "Promotion of Commerce
On-Line
in the Digital Era (Pro-CODE) Act of 1996"

SEC.2.FINDING;PURPOSE

   (a) FINDINGS.___ The Congress finds the following:
          
           (1) The ability to digitize information makes
        carrying out tremendous amounts of commerce and 
        personal communication electronically possible.
           (2) Miniaturization, disturbed computing, and
        reduced transmission costs make communication via
        electronic networks a reality.
           (3) The explosive growth in the Internet and 
        other computer networks reflects the potential
        growth of electronic commerce and personal
        communication.
           (4) The Internet and the global information
        infrastructure have the potential to revolutionize
        the way individuals and businesses conduct business.
           (5) The full potential of the Internet for the
        conduct of business cannot be realized as long as it 
        is an insecure medium in which confidential business
        information and sensitive personal information       
        remains at risk of unauthorized viewing, alteration,
        and use.
           (6) Encryption of information enables busi-
        nesses and individuals to protect themselves against
        the unauthorized viewing, alteration, and use of 
        information by employing widely understood and  
        readily available science and technology to ensure
        the confidentiality, authenticity, and integrity of
        information.
           (7) In order to promote economic growth and
        meet the needs of businesses and individuals in the
        United States, a variety of encryption products and
        programs should be available to promote good, flexi-
        ble, and commercially acceptable encryption capab-
        ilities.
           (8) United States computer, computer software and
        hardware, communications and electronics business are      
  
        leading the world technology revolution as those
        businesses have developed and are prepared to offer 
        immediately to computer users worldwide a variety of 
        communications and computers hardware and computer
        software  that provide good, robust, and easy-to-use
        encryption.
           (9) United States businesses seek to market the
        products described in paragraph(8) in competition
        with scores of foreign businesses in many countries
        that offer similar, and frequently stronger, encryp-
        tion products and programs.
            (10) UNITED STATES businesses have been
discouraged
        from further developing and marketing products with 
        encryption capabilities because of regulatory efforts
        by the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the 
        National Institute Os Standards and Technology, to
        promulgate standards and guidelines in support of 
        government-designed solutions to encryption problems 
        that
              (A) were not developed in the private sector;
                  and
              (B) have not received widespread commercial
                  support.
          (11) Because of outdated Federal controls, United
        States businesses have been prohibited from exporting
        goods encryption products and programs.
          (12) The Secretary of Commerce, acting through the
        National Institute of Standards and Technology on the     
        part of the President has attempted to leverage the     
        desire of United States businesses to sell commercial
        products to the United States Government, and sell a
        single product worldwide, to force the businesses to
        include features in products sold by the businesses in 
        the United States and in foreign countries that will    
        allow the Federal Government easy access to the plain 
        text of all electronic information and communications.       
 
          (13) Specifically, the Secretary of Commerce, acting
        through the National Institute of Standards and  
        Technology, has proposed that United states businesses  
        be allowed to sell products and programs offering good  
        encryption to the United States Government, and in  
        foreign countries only if the products and programs 
        inside a feature guaranteeing the Federal 
        Government access to a key that decrypts information
        (hereafter in this section referred to as "key escrow  
        encryption")
          (14) The key escrow encryption approach to regulating 
        encryption is reflected in the approval in 1994 by the 
        National Institute of Standards and Technology of a 
        Federal information processing standard for the 
        "clipper chip", that was flawed and controversial.
          (15) The Federal Government-
               (A) has designed key escrow encryption to solve 
                   a perceived problem: and
               (B) has ignored the fact that-
                   (i) there is no demonstrated commercial 
                      demand for features which give 
                      governments easy access to information; 
                      and  
                   (ii) numerous nonkey escrow encryption
                      alternatives are available commercially 
                      from foreign suppliers and free of charge
                      from the Internet.
          (16) In order to promote electronic commerce in the
               twenty-first century to realize the full 
               potential of the Internet and other computer
               networks-            
               (A) United States businesses should be       
                   encouraged to develop and market products
                   and programs offering encryption 
                   capabilities; and 
               (B) the Federal Government should be prohibited
                   from promulgating regulations and adopting
                   policies that discourage the use and sale of
                   encryption.
   (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of this Act is to promote
electronic
commerce through the use of strong encryption by-
          (1) recognizing that businesses in the United States 
        that offer computer hardware and computer software made 
        in the United States that incorporate encryption
        technology are ready and immediately able, with respect 
        to electronic information that will be essential to
        conducting business in the twenty-first century to-
               (A) protect the confidentiality of that
                   information: and
               (B) ensure the authenticity and integrity
                   of that information;
          (2) restricting the Department of Commerce with
        respect to the promulgation or enforcement of regulations,
        or the application of policies, that impose government-
        designed encryption standards; and     
          (3) promoting the ability of United States businesses
        to sell to computer users worldwide computer software
and
        computer hardware that provide the strong encryption
        demanded by such users by-
               (A) restricting Federal or State regulation of the
                   sale of such products and programs in
                   interstate commerce;
               (B) prohibiting mandatory key escrow encryption
                   systems; and
               (C) establishing conditions for the sale of
                   encryption products and programs in foreign
                   commerce.

SEC.3 DEFINITIONS.

    For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall
apply:
          (1) AS IS.-- The term "as is" means, in the case of
        computer software (including computer software with
        encryption capabilities). a computer software program
        that is not designed, developed or tailored by a producer
        of computer software for specific users or purchasers,
        except that such terms may include computer software 
        that-
               (A) is produced for purchasers that supply
                   certain installation parameters needed by the
                   computer software program to function properly
                   with the computer systems of the purchaser; or 
               (B) is customized by the purchaser by selecting
                   from among options contained in the computer
                   software program.
          (2) COMPUTING DEVICE- The term "computing
device"
        means a device that incorporates one or more 
        microprocessor-based central processing units that are
        capable of accepting, storing, processing, or providing
        output of data.
          (3) COMPUTER HARDWARE.- The term "computer
hardware",
        includes computer systems, equipment,
application-specific
        assemblies, modules and intergrated circuits.
          (4) DECRYPTION.- The term "decryption" means the
        unscrambling of wire or electronic communications or
        information using mathematical formulas, codes, or
        algorithms.
          (5) DECRYPTION KEY. - The term "decryption key"
means
        the variable information used in a mathematical formula,
        code, or algorithm, or any component thereof, used to
        decrypt wire or electronic communications or information
        that has been encrypted. 
          (6) DESIGNED FOR INSTALLATION BY THE USER
OR PURCHASER.-
        The term "designed for installation by the user or
        purchaser" means, in the case of computer software
        (including computer software with encryption capabilities)
        computer software-
               (A) with respect to which the producer of that
                   computer software-
                   (i) intends for the user or purchaser
                       (including any licensee or transferee),
                       to install the computer software program
                       on a computing device; and
                   (ii) has supplied the necessary instructions
                       to do so, except that the producer or
                       distributor of the computer software
                       program (or any agent of such producer or
                       distributor) may also provide telephone
                       help-line or onsite services for computer
                       software installation, electronic
                       transmission, or basic operations; and
               (B) that is designed for installation by the user
                   or purchaser without further substantial
                   support by the supplier.
          (7) ENCRYPTION.- The term "encryption" means the
        scrambling of wire or electronic communications or
        information using mathematical formulas, codes or
        algorithms in order to preserve the confidentiality,
        integrity, or authenticity of such communications or
        information and prevent unauthorized recipients from
        accessing or altering such communications.    
          (8) GENERAL LICENSE- The term "general license"
means a
        general authorization that is applicable to a type of
        export that does not require an exporter of that type
        export to, as a condition to exporting-
               (A) submit a written application to the Secretary;
                   or
               (B) receive prior written authorization by the
                   Secretary.
          (9) GENERALLY AVAILABLE.- The term "generally
available"
        means in the case of computer software (including
software
        with encryption capabilities), computer software that
               (A) is distributed via the Internet or that is
                   widely offered for sale, license, or transfer
                   (without regard to whether it is offered for
                   consideration), including over-the-counter
                   retail sales, mail order transactions,
                   telephone orders transactions electronic
                   distribution, or sale on approval.     
               (B) preloaded on computer hardware that is widely
                   available.
          (10) INTERNET.- The term "Internet" means the
        international computer network of both federal and non-
          (11) SECRETARY.- The term "Secretary" means the
        Secretary of Commerce.
          (12) STATE.- The term "State" means each of the
several
        States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the
        Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any territory or
        possession of the United States.

SEC.4. RESTRICTION OF DEPARTMENT OF
COMMERCE
          ENCRYPTION ACTIVITIES IMPOSING GOVERN-
          MENT ENCRYPTION SYSTEMS.

     (a) LIMITATION ON REGULATORY AUTHORITY
CONCERNING
ENCRYPTION STANDARDS.-The Secretary may not (acting
through the
National Institute of Standards and Technology or otherwise)
promulgate, or enforce regulations, or otherwise adopt
standards
or carry out policies that result in encryption standard for use
by businesses or entries other than Federal computer systems.

     (b) LIMITATION ON AUTHORITY CONCERNING
EXPORT OF COMPUTER
HARDWARE AND COMPUTER SOFTWARE WITH
ENCRYPTION CAPABILITIES.- The
Secretary may not promulgate or enforce regulations, or adopt
or
carry out policies in a manner inconsistent with this Act, that
have the effect of imposing government-designed encryption
standards on the private sector by restricting the export of
computer hardware and computer software with encryption
capabilities.

SEC. 5. PROMOTION OF COMMERCIAL ENCRYPTION
PRODUCTS.

     (a) PROHIBITION ON RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OR
DISTRIBUTION IN 
        INTERSTATE COMMERCE.-
          (1) IN GENERAL.- Notwithstanding any other provision
of
        law, neither the Federal Government nor any State may
        restrict or regulate the sale in interstate commerce, by
        any person of any product or program with encryption
        capabilities. Nothing in this paragraph may be construed
        to preempt any provision of Federal or State law
        applicable to contraban or regulate substances.      
          (2) APPLICABILITY.-Paragraph (1) shall apply without
        regard to the encryption algorithm selected, encryption
        key length chosen, or implementation technique or
medium
        used for a product or program with encryption
        capabilities.
     (b) PROHIBITION ON MANDATORY KEY ESCROW.-
Neither the Federal 
Government nor any State may require, as a condition of sale
in
interstate commerce, that a decryption key be given to any
person
(including a Federal agency or an entity in the private sector
that may be certified or approved by the Federal Government
or
State).
      (c) CONTROL OF EXPORTING BY SECRETARY.-
          (1) GENERAL RULE.-Notwithstanding any other
provision of
        law and subject to paragraph (2), (3) and (4), the
        Secretary shall have exclusive authority to control
        exports of all computer hardware, computer software, and
        technology with encryption capabilities, except computer
        hardware, computer software and technology that is
        specifically designed or modified for military use,
        including command, control, communications, and
        intelligence applications.
          (2) ITEMS THAT DO NOT REQUIRE VALIDATED
LICENSES.-
        Only a general license may be required, except as
        otherwise provided under the Trading With The Enemy
Act
        (50 U.S.C.App.1 et seq.) (but only to the extent that the
        authority of the International Emergency Economic Power
        Act is not exercised to extend controls imposed under the
        Export Administration Act of 1979), for the export or
        reexport of-
               (A) any computer software and computer hardware,
                   including computer software and computer
                   hardware with encryption capabilities,
                   that is-
                   (i) generally available, as is, and designed
                       for installation by the purchaser; or
                   (ii) in the public domain (including on the 
                       Internet) or publicly available because it
                       is generally accessible to the interested
                       public in any form; or
               (B) any computing devise solely because it
                   incorporates or employs in any form of computer
                   software (including computer software with
                   encryption capabilities) that is described in
                   subparagraph (A).
          (3) COMPUTER SOFTWARE AND COMPUTER
HARDWARE WITH
         ENCRYPTION CAPABILITIES.-
               (A) IN GENERAL.- Except as provided in
subparagraph
                   (B), the Secretary shall authorize the export
                   or reexport of computer software and computer
                   hardware with encryption capabilities under a
                   general license for nonmilitary end-users in
                   any foreign country to which those exports of
                   computers software and computer hardware of
                   similar capability are permitted for use by
                   financial institutions that the Secretary
                   determines not to be controlled in fact by
                   United States persons.
               (B) EXCEPTION.-The Secretary shall prohibit the
                   export or reexport of computer software and
                   computer hardware described in subparagraph (A)
                   to a foreign country if the Secretary
                   determines that there is substantial evidence
                   that such software and computer hardware will
                   be-
                   (i) diverted to a military end-use or an end-
                   use supporting international terrorism;
                   (ii) modified for military or terrorist end-
                   use; or
                   (iii) reexported without the authorization
                   required under Federal law.
      (d) STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION.- Nothing in this Act
may be construed to affect any law in effect on the day before the date
of enactment of this Act designed to prevent the distribution of
descramblers and any other equipment for illegal interceptions
cable and satellite television signals.</PRE>

<p>
<A HREF="http://www.privacy.org/ipc/">Return to Internet Privacy Coalition Home Page</a>

</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>