
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-120</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B025-55</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/freespeech/leahy_anticda_2196.html 205.177.10.31 19970215002754 text/html 29497
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:26:37 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Statement of Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT) on the CDA and the Telecomm Bill</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Senator Leahy Speaks out Against the CDA</h2>
<p>
Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT), a strong and vocal opponent of the Exon "Communications
Decency Act" amd ardent defender of free speech and privacy online, was one of only 5 
Senators to vote against the Telecommunications Reform Bill of which the CDA was part.
<p>
Senator Leahy was also the only member of the Senate to offer a  <a href = "http://www.cdt.org/policy/legislation/s714_leahy_statement.html"> substantative legislative
alternative to the Exon CDA.</a>. Senator Leahy deserves great credit for standing up for
free speech in cyberspace.
<p>
Below is the full text of his 2/1/96 statement against the telecomm bill. Click <a href = "#cda">here</a> to skip to the sections about the Communications Decency Act. 
<p>
<hr>
<pre> 				

        Statement of Senator Patrick Leahy
        on Passage of
        Telecommunications Competition and Deregulation Act
        Conference Report

        February 1, 1996


          Mr. LEAHY.  Mr. President, I thank my good friend from South
     Carolina, a man whom I have been privileged to serve with in my whole
     Senate career.  He was already a senior Member of the Senate when I
     came here.  I appreciate all the help he has given me.  I appreciate
     the fact that he and the chairman were able to protect the
     Breaux-Leahy amendment on 1-plus dialing parity as part of the
     conference report to permit intraLATA toll dialing parity requirements
     to stand in States that already ordered it by December 19, 1995, and
     in single-LATA States like Vermont.  Preserving this amendment, which
     Senator Breaux and I worked out on this floor, has helped my State.

          There are so many things I like about this bill. For example, the
     conference agreement places restrictions on buyouts between phone
     companies and cable. The conference agreement also includes a very
     strong savings clause to make clear that mergers between companies in
     the media and communications markets are subject to a thorough
     antitrust review.

        Competition, not concentration, is the surest way to assure lower
     prices and greater choices for consumers. So, while there are some
     improvements in this legislation that I support, I will not be voting
     in favor.

          I have expressed my concern on the lack of a stronger Department
     of Justice role in evaluating the anticompetitive effect of a Bell
     Operating Company's entry into the long-distance market, as well as my
     concern that this legislation is placing censorship restrictions on
     the Internet.  As a user of the Internet and as one who communicates
     electronically with constituents and others around the country, I am
     concerned this legislation places restrictions on the Internet that
     will come back to haunt us.

          I know these provisions were done with the best of intentions.
     All of us, 100 Members of the United States Senate, oppose the idea of
     child pornography.  All of us abhor child pornographers and child
     abusers.  I am one person who has prosecuted, convicted, and sent to
     prison child abusers.  We do not have to demonstrate our adherence to
     that principle.  But I am concerned we have not upheld our adherence
     to the First Amendment with the proposed restrictions on the Internet.
      That creates an overwhelming barrier for me.

          I am also concerned that after passing the 1992 Cable Act over a
     Presidential veto, that we are now taking the lid off all cable rates
     in 3 years, whether or not there is competition in cable service.
     Before the 1992 Cable Act was passed, cable rates were rising three
     times faster than inflation rates.  I do not think you can name a
     consumer in this country who did not feel that he or she was being
     gouged.

        But the law worked.  Since passage of the law, consumers have saved
     an estimated $3.5 billion in their monthly bills.  And, as the rates
     have gone down, more people have signed up.  In 1994 alone, nearly 2.5
     million new customers have signed up for cable service.

        I do not want to see a repeat of the skyrocketing cable rates that
     prompted passage of that law.  It is too easy to see what might happen
     if the cable companies are not restrained, either by competition or by
     laws.

          I do not have cable in my home in Vermont.  I live out in the
     country where we get 1  channels. I think sometimes I am blessed by
     that because I actually get to read, which is a good way of obtaining
     the news.  You can make up your own mind.  You can read in detail or
     not, and not be limited by the photographs selected by
     multimillion-dollar news media.

          But I digress.

        With the cable company I subscribe to here, you get these $2 remote
     controls but they charge you $3 a month, or something like that.  They
     can give you antiquated equipment and charge as though you were
     getting good equipment and even make it impossible to watch one show
     and tape another one.  All the things that sound great are not
     available because there is no competition.  We are about to make that
     even worse.  We had some restrictions in the cable bill, but I am
     afraid we are going to let them go before we have the protections
     provided by effective competition.

          I must admit, having said all that, I do not envy the managers of
     this bill.  This is probably the most complex piece of legislation I
     think I have seen in 21 years.  It has probably had more conflicting
     interests that had to be reconciled than I have seen in 21 years.

          I commend the Senators who had the ability to stick it out and
     bring it this far.  Senators still have to determine whether they will
     vote for or it or not, but whether you like or dislike different
     parts, we can all appreciate the hard work and long hours it took.

        The telecommunications legislation that has emerged from the
     conference will have an enormous impact on multi-billion dollar cable,
     phone and broadcast industries and, most importantly, on the American
     consumer. This legislation will affect how much we pay and from whom
     we can obtain cable, TV, phone, fax, and information services. It will
     also, unfortunately, affect what we can say online.

        We have heard a lot about the support for this legislation by the
     Bell phone companies, AT&T and other long-distance phone companies,
     the giant cable companies and other media interests. But while they
     have been arguing over business advantages, who have been advocates
     for American consumers and fundamental American values, like First
     Amendment free speech rights?

        Most of us have no choice who gives us cable TV service or our
     local phone service.  Whether or not the service is good, we're stuck
     with our local phone or cable company. And, if the price is too high,
     our only choice is to drop the service altogether. The goal of this
     telecommunications legislation must be to foster competition, not just
     for the short term, but over the long haul. Competition will give
     consumers lower prices and more choices than simply dropping a
     service.

        I raised a number of questions about the Senate-passed bill, and
     fought for several amendments that in my view would have made the bill
     more consumer-friendly, pro-competitive and constitutional.  I commend
     the conferees for the progress they made in several of these areas,
     which I detail below.

        First, the bill proposed by the Commerce Committee would have
     permitted our local phone monopoly to buy out our local cable monopoly
     so that consumers have even less choice rather than more. Senator
     Thurmond, the distinguished Chairman of the Judiciary Committee's
     Antitrust Subcommittee, and I raised concerns that allowing such
     unlimited buyouts between monopoly phone companies and cable companies
     could result in giant monopolies providing both phone and video
     programming services.

        The conference agreement makes a significant improvement in these
     provisions by limiting buy-outs between cable and phone companies to
     rural areas where fewer than 35,000 people live.  The conference
     agreement also limits a phone company's purchase of cable systems to
     less than ten percent of the households in its service area. This will
     insure that a single large phone company cannot simply buy up all the
     small cable systems serving the small towns in its service area. This
     part of the conference agreement helps fulfill the promise of the bill
     to maximize competition between local phone companies and cable
     companies.

         The conference agreement also contains a very strong "savings
     clause" to make clear that mergers between cable and telephone
     companies, or between independent telephone companies or between any
     companies in the media and communications markets are subject to a
     thorough antitrust review under the normal Hart-Scott-Rodino process.
     Nothing in this conference agreement even impliedly preempts our
     Federal antitrust laws. Mega-mergers between telecommunications
     giants, such as the rumored merger between NYNEX and Bell Atlantic, or
     the gigantic network mergers now underway, raise obvious concerns
     about concentrating control in a few gigantic companies of both the
     content and means of distributing the information and entertainment
     American consumers receive.  Competition, not concentration, is the
     surest way to assure lower prices and greater choices for consumers.
     Rigorous oversight and enforcement by our antitrust agencies is more
     important than ever to insure that such mega-mergers do not harm
     consumers.

        I have been particularly concerned about how well the
     telecommunications legislation protects universal service. Vermont is
     among the most rural States in the country, but those of us who live
     there do not want to be denied access to the advanced
     telecommunications services our urban neighbors enjoy.
     I, therefore, commend the conference report for including the
     Snowe-Rockefeller-Exon-Kerry provision requiring preferential rates
     for telecommunications services provided to schools, libraries and
     hospitals in rural areas, which I supported. This requirement provides
     an important building block to ensure universal access to advanced
     telecommunications services. Students whose families cannot afford
     sophisticated hi-tech services at home will be able to use those
     services at school or at their neighborhood public library. Rural
     hospitals will be able to use advanced technology to provide better
     treatment at lower costs to their patients. This provision assures the
     broadest possible access to advanced telecommunications services.

        I am also pleased to see that the conference report includes the
     addition of a State-appointed consumer advocate to the newly created
     Federal-State Joint Board. This board will have the critical task of
     preserving and expanding universal service, and I agree with the
     conference that a consumer advocate will bring a necessary and
     important perspective to that task.

        The conference agreement also adopts a provision designed to make
     cable equipment cheaper and easier to use for all consumers, who are
     tired of paying rent for cable converter boxes and struggling with
     multiple clickers for the TV, set-top box and their video machines.
     This provision is one that Senator Thurmond and I urged to be included
     as part of the telecommunications legislation in the last Congress.
     Under the conference agreement, the FCC is directed to assure the
     competitive availability to consumers of converter boxes and other
     electronic equipment used to access cable video programming services.

        As a member of the Judiciary Committee, I remain ready to address
     the copyright issues that will arise as a result of this legislation.
     There was no consideration of copyright matters during the debate over
     this legislation and I commend the conferees for not prejudging these
     matters.

        The bill proposed by the Commerce Committee would have
     unnecessarily preempted State efforts to promote the development of
     competition in local phone service. Richard Cowart, the Chairman of
     the Vermont Public Service Board, provided invaluable testimony to the
     Antitrust Subcommittee last year about the detrimental preemption
     provisions in the bill.

        For example, this bill rolled-back State requirements to implement
     "1+" dialing parity for short-haul toll calls. A number of States
     already require dialing parity. Without "1+" dialing parity, consumers
     must dial lengthy access codes to use carriers other than the local
     phone company for in-state toll calls. IntraLATA "1+" dialing parity
     encourages competition in the in-state toll market and helps
     consumers.

         As I noted before, I am pleased that the Breaux-Leahy amendment on
     "1+" dialing parity is part of the conference report.  The report
     permits dialing parity requirements to stand in the States that
     already ordered it by December 19, 1995, and in single-LATA States,
     including Vermont.  The prohibition against "1+" dialing parity for
     intraLATA calls in "non-grandfathered" States expires at a date
     certain three years after enactment.

        In addition, the Commerce Committee bill would have prohibited
     State regulators from using rate-of-return regulation for large phone
     companies.  As Chairman Cowart of the Vermont Public Service Board
     made clear when he testified, this prohibition would have tied the
     hands of <a name = "cda">State regulators trying to adopt different forms of pricing
     regulation to stimulate local phone service competition. The
     conference agreement took a constructive step by dropping the
     prohibition on rate-of-return regulation.

<hr>
<center><b>On the Exon CDA sections</b></center>

        Despite this significant progress, the conference agreement still
     suffers from such serious flaws that I cannot support it.

        First, and foremost, the conference agreement contains
     unconstitutional provisions that would impose far-reaching new federal
     crimes for so-called "indecent" speech. I do not often agree with
     Speaker Gingrich, but I share his view that this legislation violates
     free speech rights.</a>

        Apparently, the conferees also have serious doubts about its
     constitutionality. They added a section to speed up judicial review to
     see if the legislation passes constitutional muster. In my view, this
     legislation will not pass that test.

          You would think the telecommunications conference would have
     their hands full with just the task of changing our
     communications laws to allow new competition among phone
     companies, broadcasters, cable operators and wireless systems
     while also protecting universal service and other appropriate
     consumer protections. Yet, they also decided to add new federal
     crimes, despite the absence of any hearings on these provisions,  or
     any Senate Judiciary Committee members on the conference. I called for
     an in-depth, fast-track study of these issues before we took
     precipitous action in legislation. That study was included in the
     House-passed bill but dropped by the conference, in favor of
     provisions that will ban constitutionally protected speech on the
     Internet.

        I note that the Explanatory Statement accompanying the Conference
     Report refers to a July 24, 1995 hearing, at which I participated,
     before the Senate Judiciary Committee on "online indecency, obscenity
     and child endangerment." This hearing did not address the
     constitutionality of the indecency standard adopted by the Conference
     Report, nor the least restrictive means by which to implement such a
     standard, particularly in an electronic environment like the Internet.
     The hearing referred to in the statement of the Conference Committee
     dealt with stalking, obscenity and indecency with regard to an
     entirely different bill, S. 892.  No witnesses at the hearing defended
     the constitutionality of the indecency standard in the
     telecommunications bill.  Nor did any witness testifying in support of
     S. 892 examine in detail whether the indecency standard as applied to
     online communications complies with the least restrictive means test.
     On the contrary, several witnesses questioned whether any indecency
     standard could be constitutional as applied to online communications.
     Thus, Congress has opted to appear "tough on pornography" without
     examining the constitutional implications of this unprecedented
     restriction on freedom of expression.
        Let us make no mistake about what these provisions in the
     conference agreement will do and how it could affect you.

        o  The bill will make it a felony crime to send a private e-mail
     message with an indecent or filthy word that you hope will annoy
     another person, even if you were responding in kind to an e-mail
     message you received. Who knows when you might annoy another person
     with your e-mail message? To avoid liability under this legislation,
     users of e-mail will have to ban curse words and other expressions
     that might be characterized as offensive  from their online
     vocabulary.

        o  The bill will punish with two-year jail terms any Internet user
     who uses one of the "seven dirty words" in a message to a minor. You
     will risk criminal liability by using a computer to share with a child
     any material containing "indecent" passages. In some areas of the
     country, a copy of Seventeen magazine, could be viewed as indecent
     because it contains information on sex and sexuality. Indeed, this
     magazine is among the 10 most frequently challenged school library
     materials in the country.

        This legislation sweeps more broadly than just regulating e-mail
     messages sent to children.  It will impose felony penalties for using
     an indecent four-letter word, or discussing material deemed to be
     indecent, on electronic bulletin boards or Internet chat areas
     accessible to children.

        Once this bill becomes law, no longer will Internet users be able
     to engage in free-wheeling discussions in news groups and other areas
     on the Internet accessible to minors. They will have to limit all
     language used and topics discussed to that appropriate for
     kindergartners, just in case a minor clicks onto the discussion. No
     literary quotes from racy parts of Catcher in the Rye or Ulysses will
     be allowed. Certainly online discussions of safe sex practices, of
     birth control methods, and of AIDS prevention methods will be suspect.
     Any user who crosses the vague and undefined line of "indecency" will
     be subject to two years in jail and fines.

        Imagine if the Whitney Museum, which currently operates a Web page,
     were dragged into court for permitting representations of
     Michelangelo's David to be looked by kids.

        The conferees call this a "display" prohibition and explain that it
     "applies to content providers who post indecent material for online
     display without taking precautions that shield that material from
     minors."

        What precautions are the conferees talking about?  What precautions
     will Internet users have to take to avoid criminal liability? These
     users, after all, are the ones who provide the "content" read in news
     groups and on electronic bulletin boards. The legislation gives the
     FCC authority to describe the precautions that can be taken to avoid
     criminal liability.

     The legislation gives the FCC authority to describe the precautions
     that can be taken to avoid criminal liability. All Internet users will
     have to wait and look to the FCC for what they must do to protect
     themselves from criminal liability.

        We have already seen the chilling effect that even the prospect of
     this legislation has had on online service providers. A few weeks ago,
     America Online deleted the profile of a Vermonter who communicated
     with fellow breast cancer survivors online. Why? Because, according to
     AOL, she used the "vulgar" word "breast".  AOL later apologized and
     indicated it would permit the use of that word where "appropriate."

        Complaints by German prosecutors prompted another online service
     provider to cut off subscriber access to over 200 Internet news groups
     with the words "sex", "gay" or "erotica" in the name. They censored
     such groups as "clarinet.news.gays," which is an online newspaper
     focused on gay issues, and "gay-net.coming-out", which is a support
     group for gay men and women dealing with going public with their
     sexual orientation.

        What is next? The Washington Post reports today that one software
     program used to protect children from offensive material blocked the
     White House home page because it showed pictures of two couples
     together. Those two couples happened to be the President and Mrs.
     Clinton and the Vice-President and Mrs. Gore. Will federal government
     censors do any better when they dictate blocking technologies?

        The Communications Decency Act is the United States government's
     answer to the problem that China is dealing with by creating an
     "intranet". According to news reports, this censored version of the
     Internet allows Chinese users online access to each other, but an
     official censor controls all outside access to the world-wide
     Internet.

        We already have crimes on the books that apply to the Internet, by
     banning obscenity, child pornography, and threats from being
     distributed over computers. In fact, just before Christmas, the
     President signed a new law we passed last year sharply increasing
     penalties for child pornography and sexual exploitation crimes.

        Unlike these current laws, which do not regulate constitutionally
     protected speech, this legislation would censor indecent speech. While
     the proponents of the proposals claim that they do not "ban" indecency
     -- only prohibit making it available to minors -- the practical result
     of such a restriction on the Internet is the criminalization of all
     indecent speech.

          Because indecency means very different things to different
     people, an unimaginable amount of valuable political, artistic,
     scientific and other speech will disappear in this new medium.
     What about, for example, the university health service that posts
     information online about birth control and protections against
     the spread of AIDS?  With many students in college under 18, this
     information would likely disappear under threat of prosecution.
     In bookstores and on library shelves the protection of indecent
     speech is clear, and the courts are unwavering. Altering the
     protections of the First Amendment for online communications could
     cripple this new mode of communication.
        The Internet is a great new communications medium. We should not
     underestimate the effect that the heavy-hand of government regulation
     will have on its future growth both here and abroad. With the passage
     of this bill the U.S. Government is paving the way for the censorship
     of Internet speech. Apparently, China already censors weather
     predictions from foreigners. What do we think the Iranian government
     will make illegal? What could Libya ban and criminalize?

        Also, as I alluded earlier, I continue to have grave concerns about
     letting the Bell Operating Companies, with their monopoly control over
     the phone wires going into our homes, enter the long-distance market
     even when the Department of Justice finds an anticompetitive impact. I
     supported efforts to amend the bill and give the Justice Department
     the authority to review the Bell Companies' long-distance entry in
     advance.  These efforts were unsuccessful.

        The conference report requires the FCC to consult with the Justice
     Department and "give substantial weight" to the Justice Department's
     opinion, in determining whether to permit entry of a Bell company into
     long-distance service. Although this provision strengthens the
     Senate-passed bill, it does not go far enough.  It fails to achieve
     the balance proposed by the Commerce Committee in 1994. In the end,
     the FCC is the final decision maker and can decide to disregard the
     Justice Department's evaluation of the anticompetitive effect of
     letting the Bell Companies offer long-distance service.

        The conference agreement would permit a Bell Company to offer long
     distance service in its own region, upon approval by the FCC and after
     satisfying an "in-region" checklist. This checklist could be satisfied
     by the presence of a competitor with its own networking facilities.
     Despite recognition by the conferees that building local telephone
     network facilities will require a significant investment in time and
     money, the bill allows only 10 months after enactment for
     facilities-based competitors to get established and apply for
     interconnection and access to the Bell Company's network. Absent a
     facilities-based competitor in those 10 months, I fear that the
     language of this bill could be interpreted broadly to allow the Bell
     Operating Company to seek approval to enter long-distance service, and
     authorize the FCC to grant that approval, even without any actual
     competition in local phone service. The short time-frame provided in
     the bill to establish a facilities-based competitor, compounded by the
     lack of a dispositive Justice Department role in the approval process,
     could provide the incumbent Bell Company with the ability to use its
     stranglehold monopoly on local service to leverage its new
     long-distance service, to the detriment of consumers. Regulators will
     have to be vigilant to this potential consequence.

        As I noted, the conference agreement takes the lid off all cable
     rates in three years, whether or not there is any competition in cable
     service.
        We passed the 1992 Cable Act over a Presidential veto because
     consumers were being gouged by cable company monopolists.  Cable rates
     were rising three times faster than the inflation rate.  Consumers
     demanded action to stop the rising cable rates. This law worked. Since
     passage of that law, consumers have saved an estimated $3.5 billion in
     their monthly rates.  As rates have gone down, more people have signed
     up.
        Congress has already responded once to complaints of cable
     subscribers in the 1992 Cable Act.  I, for one, do not want to see a
     repeat of the sky-rocketing cable rates that prompted passage of that
     law. The conferees must be predicting that, in three years, cable
     companies will face plenty of competition from satellite systems and
     phone companies offering video services. But if their prediction is
     accurate, and the cable companies faced effective competition, they
     would be deregulated under the 1992 Cable Act anyway.  This is a
     precipitous action to sunset a law that worked to reduce cable rates
     on the hope that effective competition will grow over the next three
     years.

        Finally, the conference report requires the FCC to preempt State or
     local rules that may have the effect of barring any entity from
     providing telecommunications services. Although the report says this
     is not supposed to affect local management of public rights-of-way or
     local safeguards for the rights of consumers, in Vermont, citizens are
     rightly concerned that rules designed to protect our environment and
     health may be preempted by bureaucrats at the FCC who are focused on
     helping entrants in the telecommunications business.

        I recognize the need for an over-haul of our communications laws.
     We have not kept up with the dramatic technological changes that are
     fueling the Information Age. But I cannot support this bill, which
     threatens fundamental constitutional rights of free speech over the
     Internet and provides insufficient consumer protection from
     monopolistic pricing for cable and telephone service.
</DOC>