
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-105</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B018-354</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/legis_104/s1587_analysis.html 205.177.10.31 19970215014354 text/html 12878
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:42:33 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Summary of S. 1587 - Encryption Legislation</title>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
        ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS PRIVACY ACT OF 1996
        Summary
     
     SEC. 1. SHORT TITLE.  The Act may be cited as the "Encrypted 
     Communications Privacy Act of 1996."
     
     SEC. 2.  PURPOSE.  The Act would ensure that Americans have the 
     maximum possible choice in encryption methods to protect the security, 
     confidentiality and privacy of their lawful wire and electronic 
     communications.  For those Americans who choose an encryption method 
     in which another person, called a "key holder," is voluntarily 
     entrusted with the decryption key, the Act would establish privacy 
     standards for the key holder, and procedures for law enforcement 
     officers to follow to obtain assistance from the key holder in 
     decrypting encrypted communications. 
     
     SEC. 3.  FINDINGS.  The Act enumerates fifteen congressional findings, 
     including that a secure, private and trusted national and global 
     information infrastructure is essential to promote citizens' privacy 
     and meet the needs of both American citizens and businesses, that 
     encryption technology widely available worldwide can help meet those 
     needs, that Americans should be free to use, and American businesses 
     free to compete and sell, encryption technology, programs and 
     products, and that there is a need to develop a national encryption 
     policy to advance the global information infrastructure and preserve 
     Americans' right to privacy and the Nation's public safety and 
     national security.
     
     SEC. 4.  FREEDOM TO USE ENCRYPTION.  
     
        (a) Lawful Use of Encryption.  The Act legislatively confirms 
     current practice in the United States that any person in this country 
     may lawfully use any encryption method, regardless of encryption 
     algorithm, key length or implementation selected. The Act thereby 
     prohibits any government-mandated use of any particular encryption 
     system, such as a key escrow encryption system.
     
        The Act further makes lawful the use of any encryption method by 
     United States persons in a foreign country. This provision is 
     consistent with, though broader than, the Department of State's new 
     personal use exemption published in the Federal Register on February 
     16, 1996, that permits the export of cryptographic products by U.S. 
     citizens and permanent residents who have the need to temporarily 
     export the cryptographic products when leaving the U.S. for brief 
     periods of time. For example, under this new exemption, U.S. citizens 
     traveling abroad will be able to take their laptop computers 
     containing copies of Lotus Notes software, many versions of which 
     contain an encryption program otherwise not exportable.
     
        (b) General Constructions.  Nothing in the Act is to be construed 
     to require the use of encryption, a key escrow encryption system, or a 
     key holder if a person chooses to use a key escrow encryption system.
     
     SEC. 5.  ENCRYPTED WIRE AND ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS.  This section 
     of the Act adds a new chapter 122, entitled "Encrypted Wire and 
     Electronic Communications," to title 18 of the United States Code to 
     establish privacy standards for key holders and to set forth 
     procedures that law enforcement officers must follow to obtain 
     decryption assistance from key holders.
     
        (a)     In General.  New chapter 122 has five sections. 
     
        &#167; 2801. Definitions. Generally, the terms used in the new chapter 
     have the same meanings as in the federal wiretap statute in 18 U.S.C. 
     &#167; 2510. Definitions are provided for "encryption", "key holder", 
     "decryption key", and "decryption assistance". A "key holder" may, but 
     is not required to be, a Federal agency.
     
        This chapter applies only to wire or electronic communications and 
     communications in electronic storage, as defined in 18 U.S.C. &#167; 2510, 
     and not to stored electronic data. For example, encrypted electronic 
     mail messages, encrypted telephone conversations, encrypted facsimile 
     transmissions, encrypted computer transmissions and encrypted file 
     transfers over the Internet would be covered, but not encrypted data 
     merely stored on computers. 
      
        &#167; 2802. Prohibited acts by key holders.  
     
        (a)     UNAUTHORIZED RELEASE OF KEY.-  Key holders will be subject 
     to both criminal and civil liability for the unauthorized release of 
     decryption keys or providing unauthorized decryption assistance. 
     
        (b)     AUTHORIZED RELEASE OF KEY.-  Key holders are authorized to 
     release decryption keys or provide decryption assistance with the 
     consent of the key owner, as may be necessary for the holding or 
     management of the key, or to investigative or law enforcement officers 
     upon compliance with the procedures set forth in subsection (c).
     
        (c)     REQUIREMENTS FOR RELEASE OF DECRYPTION KEY TO INVESTIGATIVE 
     OR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.- To obtain access to a decryption key or 
     decryption assistance from a key holder, an investigative or law 
     enforcement officer must present to the key holder the same form of 
     lawful process used to obtain access to the encrypted content. For 
     example, to obtain the decryption key to, or decryption assistance 
     for, an encrypted telephone conversation that is the subject of a 
     court-ordered wiretap under 18 U.S.C. &#167; 2518, a law enforcement agent 
     must present a court order to the key holder to obtain the decoding 
     key. Likewise, to obtain the decryption key to, or decryption 
     assistance for, an encrypted stored wire or electronic communication, 
     a law enforcement officer must present a court warrant, order, 
     subpoena or certification, depending upon what process was used to 
     obtain access to the stored communication. 
     
        Key holders may only provide the minimal key release or decryption 
     assistance needed to access the particular communications specified by 
     court order or other legal process.  Released keys or other decryption 
     assistance may only be used in the manner and for the purpose and 
     duration expressly provided by court order or other legal process. 
     
        A key holder who fails to provide the decryption key or decryption 
     assistance called for in the court order, subpoena or other lawful 
     process may be penalized under current contempt or obstruction laws.
     
        (d)     RECORDS OR OTHER INFORMATION HELD BY KEY HOLDERS.-  Key 
     holders are prohibited from disclosing records or other information 
     (not including decryption keys) pertaining to key owners, except with 
     the owner's consent or to an investigative or law enforcement officer, 
     pursuant to a subpoena, court order or other lawful process. 
     
        (e)     CRIMINAL PENALTIES.-  Key holders who violate this section 
     for a tortious, malicious or an illegal purpose, or for direct or 
     indirect commercial advantage or private commercial gain, will be 
     subject to a fine and up to 1 year imprisonment for a first offense, 
     and fine and up to 2 years' imprisonment for a second offense. Other 
     reckless and intentional violations would subject the key holder to a 
     fine of up to $5000 and up to 6 months' imprisonment.
     
        (f)     CIVIL DAMAGES.-  Persons aggrieved by key holder violations 
     may sue for injunctive relief, and actual damages or statutory damages 
     of $5,000, whichever is greater.   
     
        (g)     DEFENSE.-       A complete defense is provided if the 
     defendant acted in good faith reliance upon a court order, warrant, 
     grand jury or trial subpoena or statutory authorization.
      
        &#167; 2803. Reporting requirements. The Attorney General is required to 
     include in her report to the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts 
     under 18 U.S.C. &#167; 2519(2), the number of orders and extensions served 
     on key holders to obtain access to decryption keys or decryption 
     assistance.  The Director of the Administrative Office of the U.S. 
     Courts is required to include this information, and the offenses for 
     which the orders were obtained, in the report to Congress under 18 
     U.S.C. &#167; 2519(3).
     
        &#167; 2804. Unlawful use of encryption to obstruct justice.
     Persons who willfully use encryption in an effort and for the purpose 
     of obstructing, impeding, or prevent the communication of information 
     in furtherance of a federal felony crime to a law enforcement officer, 
     would be subject to a fine and up to 5 years' imprisonment for a first 
     offense, and up to 10 years' imprisonment for a second or subsequent 
     offense.
     
        &#167; 2805. Freedom to sell encryption products.  
     
        (a)     IN GENERAL.- The Act legislatively confirms that it is 
     lawful to sell any encryption, regardless of encryption algorithm, key 
     length or implementation used, domestically in the United States or 
     its territories. 
     
        (b)     CONTROL OF EXPORTS BY SECRETARY OF COMMERCE.- 
     Notwithstanding any other law, the Act vests the Secretary of Commerce 
     with control of exports of hardware, software and technology for 
     information security, including encryption for both communications and 
     other stored data, except when the hardware, software or technology is 
     specifically designed or modified for military use. 
     
        No export license may be required for encryption software and 
     hardware with encryption capabilities that is generally available, 
     including mass market products (i.e., those generally available, sold 
     "as is", and designed for installation by the purchaser) or encryption 
     in the public domain and generally accessible. For example, no 
     licenses would be required for encryption products commercially 
     available without restriction and sold "as is", such as Netscape's 
     commercially available World Wide Web Browser, which can not be 
     exported.  Similarly, no license would be required to export software 
     and corresponding hardware placed in the public domain and generally 
     accessible, such as Phil Zimmermann's Pretty Good Privacy program, 
     which has been distributed to the public free of charge via the 
     Internet.
     
        In addition, the Secretary of Commerce must authorize the export of 
     encryption software to commercial users in any country to which 
     exports of such software has been approved for use by foreign 
     financial institutions, except when there is substantial evidence that 
     the software will be diverted or modified for military or terrorists' 
     end-use or re-exported without requisite U.S. authorization. Finally, 
     the Secretary of Commerce must authorize the export of computer 
     hardware with encryption capabilities if the Secretary determines that 
     a product with comparable security is commercially available from 
     foreign suppliers without effective restrictions outside the United 
     States.
     
        Significantly, the government is authorized to continue controls on 
     countries that pose terrorism concerns, such as Libya, Syria and Iran, 
     or other embargoed countries, such as Cuba and North Korea, pursuant 
     to the Trading With the Enemy Act or the International Emergency 
     Economic Powers Act.
     
        (b)     Technical Amendment.  The Act adds new chapter 122 and the 
     new title in the table of chapters in title 18 of the United States 
     Code.
    
     SEC. 6.  INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES.  The Act does not authorize the 
     conduct of intelligence activities, nor affect the conduct by Federal 
     government officers or employees in intercepting (1) encrypted or 
     other official communications of Federal executive branch or Federal 
     contractors for communications security purposes; (2) radio 
     communications between or among foreign powers or agents, as defined 
     by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA); or (3) electronic 
     communication systems used exclusively by foreign powers or agents, as 
     defined by FISA.
</pre>
<hr>
<p>
Return to <a href = "index.html">CDT Cryptography Page</a><br>
Return to <a href = "../index.html">CDT Home Page</a><br>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>