
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B08-366</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA062-000353-B004-50</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.familypolicy.com:80/positions/pp0731199600.html 206.107.214.109 19970115204310 text/html 29358
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Enterprise/2.0a
Date: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 20:51:18 GMT
Accept-ranges: bytes
Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 21:39:51 GMT
Content-length: 29152
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<title> Values Clarification in the Classroom  </title>

<body bgcolor=#000080 text=#ffffff link=#ff0000 vlink=#ff0000>

<h2 align=center> Values Clarification in the Classroom  </h2>
<h3 align=center> A Position Paper by Brannon Howse  </h3>
Sidney Simon and Lawerence Kohlberg, two of the major supporters of values clarification believe that "moral education has amounted to little more than an attempt by elders to 'impose' values upon the young. They claim to offer something different, and better. In fact, what they offer is different, but certainly no better." What they offer is "Values Clarification", courses that tell kids that there are no moral absolutes. You are the one who must decide for yourself what is right and wrong.
<p> Kohlberg has said that "traditional moral education....[is] undemocratic and unconstitutional.' Kohlberg stresses the need for a new psychology and a new philosophy that recognizes 'the child's right to freedom from indoctrination.' Adults are to view the child not as a pupil but as a 'moral philosopher' in his own right." Kohlberg says that this "reflects a 'progressive ideology' with a 'liberal, democratic and non-indoctrinative' notion of education."
<p> Values clarification proclaims that, "people are bundles of wants; the world is a battlefield of conflicting wants; and no one has room for goodness, decency, or the capacity for a positive exercise of will. Moral maturity is certainly not to be found in the clarification of values, which is cast solely in the language of narrow self-gratification and is devoid of any considerations of decency whatsoever. Finally and ironically, Simon's approach emphatically indoctrinates-by encouraging and even exhorting the student to narcissistic self-gratification."
<p> The following paragraphs are just a few of many disturbing quotes from a so called "health class" written for the eighth grade. The text book entitled, Finding My Way, published by Bennett and Mcknight of Ecino, California and authored by Audrey Palm Riker and Charles Riker, definetly encourages the gratification of self.
<p> Page 223: "Parents often fear that any contact with a homosexual will damage their child permanently, most teens emerge unharmed after such encounters. They are usually a bit wiser too. In fact, the experience may satisfy adolescent curiosity and settle the issue."
<p> Page 25: "During the past few years unmarried men and women have decided to live together without keeping it a secret. Give as many reasons as you can in favor of such an arrangement."
<p> Page 60: "This is a time of great social change. The sex role revolution may cause the biggest upheaval of all. Old ways die slowly, many men and women will continue to act out traditional roles. They'll raise their children much the same as they were raised."
<p> (Such a statement would led a child who has parents that enjoy a traditional marriage and choose to raise him with traditional values, is apart of an abnormal and possibly dysfunctional family.)
<p> Page 63: "Do you think that there are boys and girls who enjoy traditional sex roles? If yes how would you explain that they don't want to be treated equally?
<p> (This loaded question causes the child to think that traditional roles are not equal.)
<p> Page 75: "Some adults haven't kept up with changing life-styles."
<p> Page 116: "In a relaxed state the average penis is about 76 millimeters (3 inches) long and about 102 millimeters (4 inches) around."
<p> Page 156: "In spite of the Supreme Court's ruling, many people are against abortion for any reason."
<p> (Since when does the Supreme Court's ruling on a decision make it morally acceptable. For many there is a moral law that rises above natural law.)
<p> Page 159-160: "Studies show that sage legal abortions usually do not affect the female's health during future pregnancies. Most girls do not experience prolonged upset after they have an abortion. Much more common are temporary feelings of sadness, regret, guilt and mild depression. These negative emotions are often balanced off by a great sense of relief."
<p> Page 172: "It is unlikely that a female will become pregnant as long as she takes the pill as directed."
<p> Page 199: "Husbands and wives who don't have sex outside of marriage don't get VD. This could be one reason why many parents are not fully prepared to teach about sexual diseases."
<p> (Does this mean you have to be sexually active with numerous partners (and get VD) in order to qualify as a sex ed teacher. Does this mean that our kids are being instructed and influenced by sexual pervert. If married people who don't have sex outside of marriage don't get VD, then this would be a great opportunity to promote chastity and monogamy. Does this happen? No way! Exactly the opposite. Finding My Way, continues to educate kids in how to escape any ramifications for their actions."
<p> Page 200: "Many city and county health departments offer free tests and treatment. So do many family planning clinics. Parents are not notified, no matter how young the patient."
<p> Page 202: "Most city, county and private health clinics provide tests and treatment for VD. These free or low-cost services are kept confidential."
<p> (This type of advice teaches children not to turn to the people who love them most when they encounter very difficult situations. Instead, Finding My Way, encourages the child to seek advice from complete strangers. Such advice educates kids to think that their parents are unreasonable, harsh, and out of touch with reality.)
<p> Page 206-207: Masturbation is mentioned thirty-one times on these two pages.
<p> This last paragraph is extremely graphic. This is not something everyone will want to know. If you find it offensive as an adult, how do think exposure to this type of material and education effects your child.
<p> Page 224: "Some forms of sexual behavior are considered very unusual. The person seeks a nonhuman object for sexual stimulation and release. Following are some examples: Bestiality refers to a sexual contact between a person and an animal. Bestiality is most likely to take place when a human sex partner is not available. Fetishism describes the behavior of a person who reacts sexually to a nonsexual body part or an article of clothing. The object, itself is called a fetish. A fetish could be a number of things including a foot, a lock of hair, a shoe, or a piece of underclothing.
<p> (All they have to say about such perverted and deviant sexual behavior is that it is considered very unusual. Is this the type of material you want your child exposed to, much less from someone other than yourself, and in a co-ed classroom. Such information is given to our kids for no other reason except to desensitize and break down the natural and healthy, God instilled walls of innocence, purity and inhibition.)
<p> Page 89: "Exposure to sexy materials is not likely to change the average adult's character of morals.....After looking at porn, many persons show more interest. They also talk more about sex. After a while, however, their attitudes toward porn tend to go back to what they were in the first place. They may even end up a little more opposed to porn than they were originally....most persons quickly get their fill of pornography. After they have seen enough, they no longer feel pleasure of excitement."
<p> Page 241: "Children are not necessarily harmed or disturbed by child molesters."
<p> page 249: "Sometimes sexual experiences help a person feel more secure and confident......"
<p> Finding My Way, is just one example of many such text books which are in today's educational system. Some other popular values clarification courses are Quest, Duso, Project Charlie, Impressions, and Pumsey program, just to name a few. Many of these books make the traditional family look like a thing of the past. In several places throughout the text book, traditional male-female roles are portrayed as being out of touch with the times. Chapter four deals with how parents tell their kids about sex and what a hopeless job they do. In general, the book promotes a complete lack of respect for parents and their judgement when it comes to what is best for their child. Unless that is, the choice is a liberal one that fits in with what is seen as politically correct. The book certainly strives to help a child find his or her way, without a pre-determined set of values and with little or no parental assistance. Especially, if the child is being raised by a set of politically incorrect parents.
<p> Thomas and Karen Prischman, of Bismarck, North Dakota waged a long tough battle to get the book Finding My Way, out of their local school and won. The Prischmann's were correct in saying that this text book is enticing our young people into a more liberal life style. Indeed this book is not "value-free". This book as many supposed health or anti-drug and alcohol curriculum is based on the controversial "values clarification."
<p> In 1988 the United States department of Education published a booklet entitled, "Drug Prevention Curricula." This book accurately described what values clarification courses are really all about.
<p> "Curricula which emphasizes open-ended decision making about using dangerous substances should like-wise be rejected. Many curricula marketed are based on the controversial "values clarification" approach to teaching students decision making skills and ethical standards. Values clarification is a strategy that avoids leading the student to any particular conclusion, relying instead upon the child's inner feelings and logic to develop a set of values that are consistent with those embraced by the culture at large.'
<p> Studies have also shown that drug and alcohol abuse tend to rise after students go through such a class. Why? It would have to be because of the lack of setting standards on the awareness of rights and wrongs, based on the belief that there are absolutes.
<p> Today's relativistic society proclaims that there is no absolute right and wrong, no winners, no losers, no good or evil, there is only interaction of forces. Yet, they contradict this belief by stating that the only absolute is your own reasoning. This is exactly what Satan in the form of a serpent told Eve in the Garden of Eden in Genesis 3:5. And you shall know good from evil, (relativism in morality). This is also called situational ethics. Situational ethics is a system of ethics by which acts are judged within their context instead of by a categorical principles. Situational ethics says that it is very difficult to have a pre- determined set of values. Each individual must take into account with each situation, the time, place and events surrounding each circumstance. Once this has been done you can make your decision based on what the best results or outcome would be regardless of what is morally right or wrong. Many of today's school children are receiving a daily dose of this humanistic teaching under the guise of a health or anti-drug or alcohol class. Sidney Simon, and Louis E. Raths tow of the pioneers of values clarification, made the following statement in the book, values Clarification, published by Hart in 1978, (pp. 18-22). The goal of values clarification "is to involve students in practical experiences making them aware of their won feelings, their own ideas, their won beliefs, so that the choices and decisions they make are conscious and deliberate, based on their own value systems."
<p> Richard A. Baer, Jr. said in an article published in the Wall Street Journal on April 12, 1982, titled "Parents, Schools and Values Clarification." "....The originators of values clarification simply assumes that their own subjective theory of values is correct....If parents object to their children using pot or engaging in premarital sex, the theory behind values clarification makes it appropriate for the child to respond, "But that's just your value judgement. Don't force it on me."
<p> Mr. William Coulson, one of the pioneers of Quest, another very popular values clarification course, now travels the country, apologizing to parents, telling them that he is sorry for his involvement in helping develop this course, and warning them of its dangers.
<p> Another example of how schools are promoting relativism comes from Rolf Zetterson Vice President of Focus on the Family. Rolf states, "I attended a recent parent-teacher conference at the school district where our two children attended. The purpose of this meeting was to provide parents with the opportunity to review new curricula being introduced to the district. The district staff explained the basic philosophies behind the proposed material. The first principal shocked me. Henceforth, they said, 'Teachers will not be responsible for giving students the right answers. 'Wait a minute, 'I interrupted, 'can you tell me what you mean by that?' The panel of 'experts' then told me how it had come to this conclusion on the basis of years of educational research. First, we have found that what is true today may not be true tomorrow. It would be presumptuous for our instructors to today's reality down the throats of their pupils. Second, we feel that what is truth to you may not be truth to me. It is all relative. Third, we know we can severely damage a child's self-esteem by telling him he has the wrong answer.'
<p> In Belulah, North Dakota, the Mercer County Women's Action and Resource Center had developed a survey to be given to students in grades 9-12 grades. According to the Women's Resource Center, the survey, "Will give us information about students' sexual knowledge, decision-making and communications skills, importance of their values, and their attitudes toward abuse and sexual violence." As if this is any of their business or has anything to do with improving the students academic education. The following are a few of the questions asked in the survey:
<p> * If a couple has sexual intercourse and uses no birth control, the woman might get pregnant.
<ul>
 <li> A. anytime during the month.
 <li> B. Only one week before menstruation begins.
 <li> C. Only during menstruation.
 <li> D. Only one week after menstruation begins.
 <li> E. Only two weeks after menstruation begins.
</ul>
When things you've done turn out poorly, how often do you take responsibility for your behavior and it's consequences?
<ul>
 <li> A. Almost never
 <li> B. Sometimes
 <li> C. Half the time
 <li> D. Usually
 <li> E. Almost always
 <li> F. Does not apply to me
</ul>
Notice that the option always is not even available.
<p> Agree or disagree?
<ul>
 <li> Unmarried people should not have sexual intercourse
 <li> I have my own set of rules to guide my sexual behavior.
 <li> Birth control is not very important
 <li> If you love someone, you should be willing to have sex with them.
 <li> It is a good idea to live with somebody before marrying that person?
</ul>
To what extent would your friends be shocked if they thought you were having sexual intercourse?
<p> To What extent does guilt keep you from being more sexually active than you are?
<ul>
 <li> A. Not at all
 <li> B. A little
 <li> C. medium amount
 <li> D. A large amount
 <li> E. A great deal
 <li> F. Does not apply
</ul>
Notice that in these two questions the option, "I do not believe in premarital sex," is not available, thus making the student feel wierd or abnormal for being moral.
<ul>
 <li> Having my current sex life, whatever it may be, I feel _____.
</ul>
Indeed this abundant and continual increase and promotion of relativism is just another example of how scripture is being fulfilled. II Timothy 4:3, For the time will come when men will not put up with sound doctrine.....Hebrews 13:9 tells us not to be carried away by all kinds of strange teachings......
<p> William Bennett, former Secretary of Education under the Reagan administration has said, "The 'values clarification' movement didn't clarify values, it clarified wants and desires. This form of moral relativism said, in effect, that no set of values was right or wrong; everybody had an equal right to his own values; and all values were subjective, relative, personal." In his book The Devaluing of America, Dr. Bennett goes onto report that in 1985 the New York Times published an article quoting New York area educators, in slavish devotion to this new view, proclaiming that "they deliberately avoid trying to tell students what is ethically right and wrong."
<p> It is any wonder that we are seeing an ever increasing rise in rape, murder, robbery, auto theft, and mugging. Today's children are being taught that there is no right or wrong, nothing is considered good or evil, everything is relative, there is only interaction of forces. "Values clarification" promotes the idea that there are no absolutes. Each individual must decide for himself or herself what is acceptable or unacceptable behavior, according to each individual situation they encounter.
<p> A modern day example of relativism in morality would be a comment make by J.Z. Knight. J.Z. Knight who claims to channel Ramtha, a thirty-five thousand year old spirit, answered a question about murder on ABC news program 20/20. She said, "If you believe in reincarnation, how could murder be wrong?" If someone is murdered it occurred because the individual wanted it to happen or because their "bad Karma" finally caught up with them. It is possible to justify anything.
<p> Another example would be what took place in North Dakota in 1992. _____ Graywind, was pregnant and sniffing paint fumes. The local authorities caught Ms. Graywind and informed her that this was illegal and she must stop, because she was going to damage her fetus. Ms. Graywind did not stop and was ultimately thrown into jail. Once in jail Ms. Graywind was informed that she could not damage her fetus by sniffing paint fumes, but if she wanted to have an abortion that would certainly be alright. So that is exactly what happen, someone put up the money, and Ms. Graywind had an abortion. It's illegal to damage your fetus by sniffing paint fumes, but it's O.K. if you murder your fetus. One is wrong but the other is acceptable and legal.
<p> In fact, many new agers justify abortion by stating that the fetus has a conscious and the mother and the fetus consciously agree to terminate the pregnancy. The fetus consciously tells the mother that it does not want to be born at this time, through this women, or in this situation. And after all, it is really no big deal, because the fetus will just be reincarnated into someone else at a latter date.
<p> This year in St. Paul/Minneapolis, a pregnant women was murdered. The man who committed the murder was charged with a double homicide. How can you be charged with double murder when it was only a fetus, a mass of tissue? If the women had gone to an abortion clinic and the baby was sucked out of her by a vacuum, that would have been just fine. Where is the consistency?
<p> Dr. ____ an abortion doctor in _____ has been charge with assault because he did not successfully preform an abortion, the baby lived. The doctor did manage to cut of the little girls arm, thus the charge for assault. What the doctor is really guilty of is not killing the baby. If he had been successful he would not be in trouble, but because he was not successful in killing the baby, but in cutting off her arm, he is charged with assault. Figure that one!
<p> Should we really be surprised by such relativistic and humanistic ideals? After all if I am god, then I can determine my own reality. Such promotion of relativism has brainwashed and desensitized an entire generation. No wonder our court systems are back logged with trail after pending trail. Our prisons are so full now that many offenders who would have once done time, now receive probation. If our schools would promote a morally based value system founded on the belief that there is right and wrong, and that wrong choices and decisions have consequences. Then perhaps, we would see a decline in our prison population and thus a decline in tax funded court case after tax funded court case.
<p> A real attempt is being made to clarify our kids values. Values that are based on their own feelings and desires, not moral absolutes. An example of such attempts is a most recent national debate that has and is being waged over the "Children of the Rainbow" curriculum. Three of the controversial books included in this set of curricula are entitled "Daddy's Roommate, Heather Has Two Mommies and Gloria Goes to Gay Pride.
<p> In the December 14, 1992 issue of Time Magazine, an article entitled "Jack and Jack and Jill and Jill", had this to say about the content of one of the books.
<p> "Daddy's Roommate is a congenial children's book about a boy in a not-so-unusual position; his parents have divorced. The rest of his story is a bit more unconventional. His father is living with a new companion named Frank. The boy is told my his mother that "Daddy and Frank are gay ....being gay is just one more kind of love." Kids who turn the pages will learn that the two men live together. They "eat together". And one other thing. They "sleep together."
<p> Oh, by the way, if this material is not discouraging enough, did I fail to mention that these books are on the recommended reading list for first graders in New York City. According to an article in the January 12, 1993 issue of USA Today, district board President Mary Cummins has publicly vowed not to implement the 443- page curriculum that New York Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez developed last year as a result of a 1989 policy on multicultural education. Three pages on "Families" teach respect for all types, including gay and lesbian. New York's decentralized system has 32 community school districts, each with a nine-member board that controls all elementary and middle schools in their area.
<p> A spokesman for the Chancellor said that out of the 32 districts, eight accepted the curriculum as is. The rest tinkered with the controversial sections, voting to either delete or delay them until later grades.
<p> When Mary Cummins and the district 24 members refused the entire document, Chancellor Fernandes fired them. The Board of Education eventually reinstated them. The Chancellors spokesmen then said that the curriculum could be ignored as long as local boards devise a way to adhere to the Board of Education's policy on multicultural education. I am also happy to say that Chancellor Fernandes himself was fired just a few months later in February.
<p> Mary Cummins said, "I will not demean legitimate minorities, such as blacks Hispanics, Asians, whatever, by lumping them together with homosexuals. Homosexuals do not come under a racial or ethnic minority."
<p> According to the article in USA Today, Howard Hurwitz, Chairman of the Family Defense Council of New York City sees the increase in use of curriculum on sexual orientation as "a national problem." Hurwitz says, "Its not sex education at all, it's sex titillation." Hurwitz goes on to say, "I'm no homophobe in the sense that I give a hoot in ___ what the individual homosexual is doing with his life. But I am concerned for what they are doing in the schools."
<p> Ruth Messinger, who appeared on Nightline on ________ 1992 to argue in favor of this curriculum proclaimed that such a curriculum is necessary because these are the issues that are on the minds of first graders. Bologna! I guarantee you that the subject of homosexual/lesbian lifestyles and relationships is not on the minds of first graders. Not unless someone has deliberately placed this subject on their minds. What is on the minds of first graders is the same subject that has been on the minds of children in the first grade for many years, lunch and recess. Those who write and promote such perverted propaganda want this to be on the minds of children. Their goal is to desensitize an educate an entire generation in the belief that such lifestyles are normal and acceptable. In order to develope such a generation you must start with those that are young and impressionable. Remember the words of Brooks Alexander? "In the ideological contest for cultural supremacy, public education is the prime target; it influences the most people in the most pervasive way at the most impressionable age. No other social institution has anything close to the same potential for mass indoctrination.
<p> The proposed purpose of the curriculum, "Children of the Rainbow", according to the article in Time Magazine, was to foster respect for all races, ethnic groups and religions...." Did you catch that? Respect for religions? Since when have educators been interested in teaching children respect for the traditional judeo Christian religious system. Our kids are taught through multiculturalism to understand and accept the culture and religion of the Hindu, Buddhist and Moslem. In fact, in the original wording of the "Children of the Rainbow" curriculum, teachers were urged to encourage first graders "to view lesbians/gays as real people to be respected and appreciated."
<p> The elite in education are feeling so proud and self righteous because, they love everybody and are accepting of other people, cultures and lifestyles. Yet, from the other side of their mouth they ridicule the traditional family, traditional values and traditional sex roles. How can you say you are accepting of other lifestyles and religions when you won't even permit the Bible to be apart of education, even from a historical point of view. After all, the Bible is not only a great piece of historical literature, but the foundation on which the Judeo Christian religion is based. Not to mention that our country was founded upon many Judeo Christian values and that for many years judaism has been the major religion of our country. Yet the Bible is not permitted in the classroom. A book on Buddha? no problem, but not the Bible. To the educational elite I say, don't tell me you want to foster respect and acceptance for all lifestyles and religions, when you won't even teach traditional Judeo Christian history. Especially when you teach and promote acceptance and respect for other religions and lifestyles that are diametrically opposed to the Judeo christian faith. "I can think of no single action that would be better...than letting someone back into our schools that liberals would probably call a dead white man, I'm talking about God. Think about it. We now teach kids to use condoms, we instruct them in milticulturalism, we tell them lies about American history, and yet we can't teach them the Ten Commandments. We can't 'Thou Shalt Not Steal,' 'Thou Shalt Not Kill.'This is nothing less than depriving children of their moral and mental nutrients during their formative years." By not teaching the opposite religion or lifestyle, in essence you are saying that any other way of life or belief is not important and does not merit acceptance or respect. Thus you are promoting an attitude of nonacceptance and disrespect for a lifestyle and a religion, the very attitude you are supposedly against. The belief that you can avoid projecting a belief or statement on an issue by avoiding it or ignoring it is false. When you avoid teaching on a subject you a lot, you are saying that it is not important or worthy of your time and attention. Sir Walter Moberly said: "It is a fallacy to suppose that by omitting a subject you teach nothing about it. On the contrary, you teach that it is to omitted, and therefore a matter of secondary importance." Paul Vitz author of Censorship: Evidence of Bias in our Children's Textbooks, wrote, "Religion, traditional family values and conservative political and economic positions have been reliably excluded from the children's textbooks." It is interesting to note that in 1985 Paul Vitz conducted a federally funded study on the content of textbooks in the public-school. This study was conducted through the National Institute of Education.
<p> Without a doubt there has been an ever increasing moral decline in our country since the movement of the sixties. It was during this time that we saw such a dramatic turn from the traditional standards of right and wrong and replaced by the belief in moral relativism. The result for us today is the educational system that now exists. An educational system that refuses to teach morality. As if that were not bad enough, the educational system seems to go to great extremes to promote just the opposite, immorality. Oxford's Mary Warnock has written, "You cannot teach morality yourself; and you cannot be committed to morality yourself with out holding that some things are right and others wrong." When we look back years from now, should our Lord Tarry, the words of Abraham Lincoln will ring out with a chilling whisper of, "I told you so." Abraham Lincoln said, "The philosophy of education in one generation will be the philosophy of government in the next."

</DOC>