
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-110</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B025-166</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/freespeech/grassley_1195.html 205.177.10.31 19970215003024 text/html 17004
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:29:06 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>New Grassley Online Indecency Proposal (November 1995)</title>
</head>
<body>

<pre>

OBSCENE OR HARASSING USE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES UNDER THE 
COMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1934.

(A)  Offenses: Section 223 (47 U.S.C. 223) is amended--
   (1)  in subsection (a) and inserting in lieu thereof:
  
(a)  Whoever--
  (1)  in the District of Columbia or in interstate or foreign 
communications

  (A)  by means of telecommunications device knowingly-

        (i)  makes, creates, or solicits, and 
        (ii)  initiates the transmission of,

any comment, request, suggestion, proposal, image, or other 
communications which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or indecent, 
with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass another person:

  (B)  makes a telephone call or utilizes a telecommunications device, 
whether or   not conversation or communications ensues, without 
disclosing his identity and with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or 
harass any person at the called number or who receives the 
communications;

  (C)  makes repeated telephone calls or repeatedly initiates 
communication with a telecommunications device, during which 
conversation or communication ensues, solely to harass any person at the 
called number or who receives the communication;

   (2) knowingly permits any telecommunications facility under his 
control to be used for any activity prohibited by paragraph (1) with the 
intent that it be so-used for such activity,

shall be fined not more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more than two 
years, or both.

(2) by adding at the end the following new subsections:

 (d)  Whoever--
 
   (1)  knowingly within the United States or in foreign communications 
with the United States by means of a telecommunications device makes or 
makes available any obscene communicatioin in aby form including any 
comment, request, suggestion, proposal, or image regardless of whether 
the maker of such communication place the call or initiated the 
communications; or

   (2)  knowingly permits any telecommunication facility under such 
person's control be used for an activity prohibited by subsection 
(d)(1), (e), (f) with the intent that it be used for such activity,

shall be fined not more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more than two 
years or both.

 (e)(1)  Any content provider within the United States or in foreign 
communications with the United States who knowingly makes an indecent 
communication to any person under 18 years of age shall be fined not 
more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more than two years or both.

    (2)  any content provider within the United States or in foreign 
communications with the United States who knowingly makes available an 
indecent communication to any person under 18 years of age without 
undertaking good faith efforts to ensure that such communication was not 
available to any person under 18 years of age shall be fined not more 
than $100,00 or imprisoned not more than two years or both.

 (f)  Any access provider within the United States or in foreign 
communications with the Unites States who

  (1)  willfully provides a person with access to a computer 
communications facility to make or make available an indecent 
communication to any person under 18 years of age, or

  (2)  willfully provides any person under 18 years of age with access 
to a computer communications facility which makes or makes available any 
indecent communication to such person

shall be fined not more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more than two 
years or both.

   (g)  No cause of action may be brought in any court or administrative 
agency against any person on account of any activity which is not in 
violation of any law punishable by criminal or civil penalty, which 
activity the person has taken in good faith to implement a defense 
authorized under this section or otherwise to restrict or prevent the 
transmission of, or access to, a communications specified in this 
section.

   (h)  No employer shall be held liable under this section for the 
actions of an employee or agent unless the employee's or agent's conduct 
is within the scope of his employment or agency and the employer has 
knowledge of, authorizes, or ratifies the employee's or agent's conduct.

   (I)  Nothing in this subsection shall preclude any State or local 
government from enacting and enforcing laws and regulations which do not 
result in the imposition of inconsistent obligation on the provision of 
interstate services.

   (h)  The use of the term 'telecommunications device' in this section 
shall not impose new obligations on (one-way) broadcast radio or (one-
way) broadcast television operators licensed by the Commission or (one-
way) cable service registered with the Federal Communications Commission 
and covered by obscenity and indecency provision elsewhere in this act.

(I)  Definitions - As used in this subsection--

  (1) the term "content provider" means: 

(a) any remote computer facility that provides to the public computer 
storage or processing services by means of an electronic communications 
system; and permits a computer user to transfer electronic or digital 
material from the facility to another computer; 

(b) any electronic communications service including any wire, radio, 
electromagnetic, photo optical, or photo electronic system for the 
transmission of electronic communications, and any computer facility or 
related electronic equipment for the electronic storage of such 
communications, that permits a computer user to transfer electronic or 
digital material from the service to another computer; and 

(c) any electronic bulletin board service means a computer system, 
regardless of whether operated for commercial purposes, that exist 
primarily to provide remote or on-site users with information or 
entertainment, including digital images, or that exists primarily to 
permit remote or on-site users to participate in or create on-line 
discussion groups or conferences or any user of computer communications 
services which creates, in whole or in part, or disseminates content.

(2)  the term "access provider" means any 

(a) any remote computer facility that provides to the public computer 
storage or processing services by means of an electronic communications 
system; and permits a computer user to transfer electronic or digital 
material from the facility to anther computer; 

(b) any electronic communications service including any wire, radio, 
electromagnetic, photo optical, or photo electronic system of the 
transmission of electronic communications, and any computer facility or 
related electronic equipment for the electronic storage of such 
communications, that permits a computer user to transfer electronic or 
digital material from the service to another computer; and 

(c) any electronic bulletin board service means a computer system, 
regardless of whether operated for commercial purposes, that exists 
primarily to provide remote or on-site users with information or 
entertainment, including digital images, or that exists primarily to 
permit remote or on-site users to participate in or create on-line 
discussion groups or conferences which provides access to any computer 
communications facility over which the access provider has no control.

Sec._ OBSCENE PROGRAMMING ON CABLE TELEVISION.
Section 639 (47 U.S.C. 559) is amended by striking "$10,000" and 
inserting "$100,000".

Sec._ BROADCASTING OBSCENE LANGUAGE ON RADIO.
Section 1464 of Title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking out 
"$10,000" and inserting "$100,000".
Sec._ SEPARABILITY

(a) If any provision of this Title, including amendments to this Title 
or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held 
invalid, the remainder of this Title and the application of such 
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected 
thereby. 

(B) 18 USC 1462. IMPORTATION OR TRANSPORTATION OF OBSCENE MATTERS

(1) Whoever brings into the United States, or any place subject to the 
jurisdiction thereof, INCLUDING BY COMPUTER or knowingly uses any 
express company or other common carrier, for carriage in interstate or 
foreign commerce--

(a) any obscene, lewd, lascivious, or filthy book, pamphlet, picture, 
motion picture film, paper, letter, writing, print, or other matter of 
indecent character; or

(b) any obscene, lewd, lascivious, or filthy phonograph recording, 
electrical transcription, or other article or thing capable of producing 
sound; or

(c) any drug, medicine, article, or thing designed, adapted, or intended 
for producing abortion, or for any indecent or immoral use; or any 
written or printed card, letter, circular, book, pamphlet, 
advertisement, or notice of any kind giving information, directly or 
indirectly, where, how, or of whom, or by what means any of such 
mentioned articles, matters, or things may be obtained or made; or

(2)  Whoever knowingly takes OR RECEIVES from such express company or 
other common carrier, OR BY COMPUTER, any matter or thing the carriage 
OR IMPORTATION of which is herein made unlawful -- Shall be fined under 
this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both, for the 
first such offense and shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not 
more than ten years, or both, for each such offense thereafter.

(C) 18 USC 1465.  Transportation of Obscene Matters for Sale or 
Distribution

Whoever knowingly TRANSPORTS OR TRAVELS IN, OR USES A FACILITY OR MEANS 
OF interstate or foreign commerce, INCLUDING A COMPUTER IN OR AFFECTING 
SUCH COMMERCE for the purpose of sale or distribution OF, any obscene, 
lewd, lascivious, or filthy book, pamphlet, picture, film, paper, 
letter, writing, print, silhouette, drawing, figure, image, cast, 
phonograph recording, electrical transcription or other article ca[able 
of producing sound or any other matter of indecent or immoral character, 
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years, 
or both.

The transportation as aforesaid of two or more copies of any publication 
or two or more of any article of the character described above, or a 
combined total of five such publications and articles, shall create a 
presumption that such publications or articles are intended for sale or 
distribution, but such presumption shall be rebuttable.

(D)(1)  WHOEVER KNOWINGLY COMMUNICATES BY COMPUTER IN OR AFFECTING 
INTERSTATE OR FOREIGN COMMERCE, TO ANY PERSON WHO HAS NOT ATTAINED THE 
AGE OF 18 YEARS, ANY INDECENT MATERIAL, SHALL BE FINED UNDER THIS TITLE 
OR IMPRISONED NOT MORE THAN FIVE YEARS, OR BOTH

(E)  Preemption of State and Local Governments.

Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit state and local 
government from imposing liability for conduct described in this Act 
provided that such liability does not give rise to inconsistent 
obligations.

(F)  Constitutional Challenges.

Any action challenging the constitutionality of any portion of this Act 
shall be heard and determined by district court of three judges in 
accordance with section 2284.  Title 28, United States Code, provided 
that such district shall be composed of two judges from the court of 
appeals and one judge from the district court and that venue fro such 
challenge shall be the United States District Court for the District of 
Columbia.

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE

This Act may be cited as the "Internet Freedom and Family Empowerment 
Act".

SEC.2. ONLINE FAMILY EMPOWERMENT</b>

Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. et seq.) is 
amended by adding at the end the following new section:

"SEC.230. PROTECTION FOR PRIVATE BLOCKING AND SCREENING OF OFFENSIVE 
MATERIAL; FCC CONTENT AND ECONOMIC REGULATION OF COMPUTER SERVICES 
PROHIBITED.

"(a) FINDINGS. - The Congress finds the following:

"(1)  The rapidly developing array of Internet and other interactive 
computer service available to individual Americans represent an 
extraordinary advance in the availability of educational and 
informational resources to our citizens.
"(2)  These services offer users a great degree of control over the 
information that they receive, as well as the potential for even greater 
control in the future as technology develops.

"(3)  The Internet and other interactive computer services offer a forum 
for a true diversity of political discourse, unique opportunities for 
cultural development, and myriad avenues for intellectual activity.

"(4)  The Internet and other interactive computer services have 
flourish, to the benefit of all Americans, with a minimum of government 
regulation.

"(5)  Increasingly Americans are relying on interactive media for a 
variety of political, educational, cultural and entertainment services.

"(b) POLICY. -- It is the policy of the United States to --

"(1)  promote the continued development of the Internet and other 
interactive computer services and other interactive media;

"(2)  preserve the vibrant and competitive free market that presently 
exists for the Internet and other interactive computer services, 
unfettered by State or Federal regulation;

"(3)  encourage the development of technologies which maximize user 
control over the information received by individuals, families, and 
schools who use the Internet and other interactive computer services;

"(4)  remove disincentives for the development and utilization of 
blocking and filtering technologies that empower parents to restrict 
their children's access to objectionable or inappropriate online 
material; and

"(5)  ensure vigorous enforcement of criminal laws to deter and punish 
trafficking in obscenity, stalking, and harassment by means of computer.

"(c)  PROTECTION FOR 'GOOD SAMARITAN' BLOCKING AND SCREENING OF 
OFFENSIVE MATERIAL.--</b> No provider or user of interactive computer 
services shall be treated as the publisher or speaker of any information 
provided by an information content provider.  No provider or user or 
interactive computer services shall be held liable on account of--

"(1)  any action voluntarily taken in good faith to restrict access to 
material that the provider or user considers to be obscene, lewd, 
lascivious, filthy, excessively violent, harassing, or otherwise 
objectionable, whether or not such material is constitutionally 
protected; or

"(2)  any action to make available to information content providers or 
others the technical means to restrict access to material described in 
paragraph (1).

"(d) FCC REGULATION OF THE INTERNET AND OTHER INTERACTIVE COMPUTER 
SERVICES PROHIBITED.-- Nothing in the Act shall be construed to grant 
any jurisdiction or authority to the Commission with respect to content 
or other regulation of the Internet or other interactive computer 
services.

"(e)  EFFECT ON OTHER LAWS.

"(1)  NO EFFECT ON CRIMINAL LAW.-- Nothing in this section shall be  
construed to impair the enforcement of section 223 of the Act, chapter 
71 (relating to obscenity) or 110 (relating to sexual exploitation of 
children) of title 18, United States Code or any other Federal criminal 
statute.

"(2)  NO EFFECT ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW.-- Nothing in this section 
shall be construed to limit or expand any law pertaining to intellectual 
property.

"(3)  IN GENERAL.-- Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
prevent any State from enforcing any State law that is consistent with 
this section.

"(f) DEFINITIONS.-- As used in this section:

"(1) INTERNET.-- The term 'Internet' means the international computer 
network of both Federal and non-Federal interoperable packet switched 
data networks.

"(2)  INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE.-- The term 'interactive computer 
service' means any information service that provides computer access to 
multiple users via modem to a remote computer server, including 
specifically a service that provides access to the Internet.

"(3)  INFORMATION CONTENT PROVIDER.--  The term 'information content 
provider' means any person or entity that is responsible, in whole or in 
part, for the creation or development of information provided by the 
Internet or any other computer service, including any person or entity 
that creates or develops blocking or screening software or other 
techniques to permit user control over offensive material.

"(4)  INFORMATION SERVICE.-- The term 'information service' means the 
offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, 
transforming, processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available 
information via telecommunications, and includes electronic publishing, 
but does not include any use of such capability for the management, 
control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the management 
of a telecommunications service."


</pre>
<hr>
Return to the href = "http://www.cdt.org/cda.html">Net Censorship Issues 
Page</a>

</body>
</html>
</DOC>