
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-86</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B018-371</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/crypto/legis_104/s1587_leahy.html 205.177.10.31 19970215014404 text/html 11845
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:42:46 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Statement by Sen. Leahy on Introduction of S. 1587</title>
</head>
<body>
<pre>
        STATEMENT OF SENATOR LEAHY ON INTRODUCTION OF
        ENCRYPTED COMMUNICATIONS PRIVACY ACT OF 1996
     
        March 5, 1996
     
        I am joined today by Senators Burns, Dole, Pressler and Murray in 
     introducing a bill that is pro-business, pro-jobs and pro-privacy. 
     
        The "Encrypted Communications Privacy Act of 1996" would enhance 
     the global competitiveness of our high-tech industries, protect the 
     high-paying good jobs in those industries and maximize the choices in 
     encryption technology available for businesses and individuals to 
     protect the privacy, confidentiality and security of their computer, 
     telephone, and other wire and electronic communications.
     
        The guiding principle for this bill can be summed up in one 
     sentence:  Encryption is good for American business and good business 
     for Americans. 
     
        FBI Director Louis Freeh testified last week at a hearing on 
     economic espionage and quoted Secretary of State Warren Christopher as 
     saying that "our national security is inseparable from our economic 
     security." I could not agree more. Yet, American businesses are 
     suffering a double blow from our current encryption policies.  First, 
     American firms lose billions of dollars each year due to the theft of 
     proprietary economic information, which could be better protected if 
     strong encryption were more widely used. Second, government export 
     restrictions tie the hands of American high-tech businesses by barring 
     the export of strong encryption technology.  The size of these 
     combined losses makes encryption one of the critical issues facing 
     American businesses today. 
     
        Moreover, the increasing use of and dependency on networked 
     computers by Americans to obtain critical medical services, to conduct 
     research, to be entertained, to go shopping and to communicate with 
     friends and business associates, raises special concerns about the 
     privacy and confidentiality of their computer transmissions. I have 
     long been concerned about these issues, and have worked over the past 
     decade to create a legal structure to foster privacy and security for 
     our wire and electronic communications. Encryption technology provides 
     an effective way to ensure that only the people we choose can read our 
     communications.
     
        A leading encryption expert, Matt Blaze, told me in a recent letter 
     that our current regulations governing the use and export of 
     encryption are having a "deleterious effect... on our country's 
     ability to develop a reliable and trustworthy information 
     infrastructure."  It is time for Congress to take steps to put our 
     national encryption policy on the right course. 
     
        The Encrypted Communications Privacy Act would accomplish three 
     goals:
     
        First, the bill encourages the use of encryption by legislatively 
     confirming that Americans have the freedom to use and sell here in the 
     United States any encryption technology that they feel is most 
     appropriate to meet their privacy and security needs. The bill bars 
     any government-mandated use of any particular encryption system, such 
     as a key escrow encryption system.
      
        Second, for those Americans who choose to use a key escrow 
     encryption method, the bill establishes privacy standards for key 
     holders and stringent procedures for how law enforcement can obtain 
     access to decoding keys and decryption assistance. These standards 
     would subject key holders to criminal and civil liability if they 
     released the keys or divulged the identity and information about the 
     user of the encryption system, without legal authorization.  
     Commenting on these provisions, Bruce Schneir, who has literally 
     written the textbook on encryption, said in a recent letter to me that 
     the bill "recognizes the special obligations of keyholders to be 
     vigilant in safeguarding the information entrusted to them, without 
     imposing hurtles on the use of cryptography."
     
        Finally, the bill loosens export restrictions on encryption 
     products. Under the bill, it would be lawful for American companies to 
     export high-tech products with encryption capabilities when comparable 
     encryption capabilities are available from foreign suppliers, and 
     generally available encryption software, including mass market 
     products and encryption that is in the public domain. According to Mr. 
     Schneir, the bill "removes the strangle-hold that has encumbered the 
     development of mass-market security solutions" which are so vital to 
     the development of our information infrastructure. 
     
        Senator Murray took a leading role in the last Congress on 
     reforming our export restrictions on encryption, and I commend her for 
     continuing to give this important issue her committed attention again 
     in this Congress. 
     
        Current export restrictions allow the export of primarily weak 
     encryption software programs.  So weak, in fact, that a January 1996 
     report by an ad hoc group of world-renowned cryptographers and 
     computer scientists estimated that it would take a pedestrian hacker a 
     matter of hours to break and a foreign intelligence agency a matter of 
     nanoseconds to break.  No wonder that foreign buyers of encryption 
     products are increasingly looking elsewhere for strong security.  This 
     hurts the competitiveness of our high-tech industry. 
     
        A recent report by the Computer Systems Policy Project, which is a 
     group of major American computer companies estimated that U.S. 
     companies stand to lose between $30 and 60 BILLION in revenues and 
     over 200,000 of high-tech jobs by the year 2000 because U.S. companies 
     are handicapped in the global market by outdated export restrictions.
     
        Even the Commerce Department reported in January that U.S. export 
     controls may have a "negative effect on U.S. competitiveness" and "may 
     discourage" the use of strong encryption domestically since 
     manufacturers want to make only one product for export and for use 
     here.
     
        Although American companies account for almost 75 percent of the 
     global market for prepackaged software, the rest of the world is 
     competing strongly in the market for encryption software.  
     Short-sighted government policy is holding back American business. 
     Almost two years ago, I chaired a hearing of the Judiciary 
     Subcommittee on Technology and the Law on the Administration's 
     "Clipper Chip" key escrow encryption program. I  heard testimony about 
     340 foreign encryption products that were available worldwide, 155 of 
     them employing encryption in a strength that American firms were 
     prohibited from exporting.  
     
        In two short years, those numbers have increased.  According to a 
     survey of cryptographic products conducted by Trusted Information 
     System, as of December 1995, 497 foreign products from 28 countries 
     were available with encryption security. Almost 200 of these foreign 
     products used strong encryption that American companies are barred 
     from selling abroad.  This study draws the obvious conclusion that "As 
     a result, U.S. Government restrictions may be succeeding only in 
     crippling a vital American industry's exporting ability."
     
        At the Clipper Chip hearing I chaired in 1994, I heard a number of 
     reports about American companies losing business opportunities due to 
     U.S. export restrictions.  One data security company reported that 
     despite its superior system, it had been unable to respond to requests 
     from NATO and foreign  telecommunications companies because it cannot 
     export the encryption they demanded. This cost this single American 
     company millions in foregone business.  Another major computer company 
     lost two sales in Western Europe in a single year totaling about $80 
     million because the file and data encryption in the integrated system 
     they offered was not exportable.
      
        Our current export restrictions on encryption technology are 
     fencing off the global marketplace and hurting the competitiveness of 
     this part of our high-tech industries.  While national and domestic 
     security concerns must weigh heavily, we need to do a better job of 
     balancing these concerns with American business' need for encryption 
     and the economic opportunities for our high-tech industries that 
     encryption technology provides. 
     
        American businesses are not only suffering lost sales because of 
     our current export restrictions, but are also suffering staggering 
     losses due to economic espionage. FBI Director Freeh testified that 
     the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy puts the 
     amount of that loss at $100 billion per year. At a hearing last week 
     on economic espionage, we heard from one witness who had to close down 
     his software company, with a loss of 25 jobs, after China bribed an 
     employee to steal the source code for the company's software.
     
        We have bills pending before Congress to enact new criminal laws to 
     punish people who steal trade secrets or other proprietary information 
     and who break into computers to steal sensitive information.  But new 
     criminal laws are not the whole answer. Criminal laws often only come 
     into play too late, after the theft has occurred or the injury 
     inflicted. 
     
        We must encourage American firms to take preventive measures to 
     protect their vital economic information. That is where encryption 
     comes in.  Just as we have security systems to lock up our offices and 
     file drawers, we need strong encryption systems to protect the 
     security and confidentiality of business information. 
     
        The Computer Systems Policy Project estimates that, without strong 
     encryption, financial losses by the year 2000 from breaches of 
     computer security systems to be from $40 to $80 billion. 
     Unfortunately, some of these losses are already occurring.  One U.S. 
     based manufacturer is quoted in the Project's report, saying:
     
        "We had a multi-year, multi-billion dollar contract stolen off our 
     P.C. (while bidding in a foreign country). Had it been encrypted, [the 
     foreign competitor] could not have used it in the bidding time frame."
     
        New technologies present enormous opportunities for Americans, but 
     we must strive to safeguard our privacy if these technologies are to 
     prosper in this information age.  Otherwise, in the service of law 
     enforcement and intelligence needs, we will dampen any enthusiasm 
     Americans may have for taking advantage of the new technologies.
     
        I look forward to working with my colleagues on this important 
     matter, and ask unanimous consent that my full statement, the bill, a 
     summary of the bill and three letters of support from Matt Blaze, 
     Bruce Schneir, and Business Software Alliance, be included in the 
     Record.
</pre>
<hr>
<p>
Return to <a href = "index.html">CDT Cryptography Page</a><br>
Return to <a href = "../index.html">CDT Home Page</a>

</body>
</html>
</DOC>