
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B17-159</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA060-000326-B037-22</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.eren.doe.gov:80/erec/factsheets/2.html 205.168.79.27 19970115012026 text/html 22726
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 01:20:30 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wed, 29 May 1996 23:05:07 GMT
Content-length: 22551
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>

<META NAME="AUTHOR" CONTENT="webmaster">

<META NAME="CREATIM" CONTENT="1995:6:19:13:14:">

<META HTTP-EQUIV="Expires" CONTENT="July 19, 1996 00:00:00 MDT">


<title>Solar Heat Storage</title>
</head>
<body>

<h1>Solar Heat Storage</h1>


One question people ask when considering solar heating is, What do you do 
after sunset or when the day is overcast?  The answer is that most solar 
heating systems have a storage component of masonry rock, phase change 
materials or water.  At the very least, any solar heating systems's 
storage component should absorb enough heat during a sunny day to keep a 
house warm throughout the night.<p>

The two main types of solar heating systems, passive and active, store 
heat differently.  Passive systems use the building itself and/or heat 
storage components to collect and store solar energy, while active 
systems use pumps or fans to move heat to and from storage tanks or rock 
bins.<p>

<b>Storage in Passive Systems</b><p>

Passive solar buildings absorb and store solar heat in masonry floors, 
walls, room dividers, water-filled tubes and drums or in containers 
filled with phase change material.  A well designed passive building can 
store enough heat to keep it warm after sunset, through the night, and 
possibly through a day or two of sunless weather.<p>

The location of a passive building's storage mass depends upon which 
passive collection method is used. For the popular direct gain approach 
the room admits sunlight through large south-facing windows.  Solar 
radiation strikes the masonry walls and floors where it is partly 
absorbed as heat.  The heat remains in the masonry until the air in the 
room cools to a temperature below that of the masonry. Because heat flows 
from warmer to cooler areas, the stored heat is drawn into the room.  
However, if the amount of solar heat entering the room exceeds the 
storage system's capacity to absorb and store the heat, the house will 
overheat and valuable solar energy will be wasted.  The key to the 
efficient use of the direct gain approach is to include the proper amount 
of heat storage material for the amount of south-facing glazing.  The 
proper ratio depends upon the local climate and the amount of sunshine 
available, type of glazing used, type of heat storage material and its 
thickness and distribution, type of covering for the heat storage 
material (e.g. tiles, hardwood or paint), and the amount of heat storage 
materials exposed to direct sunlight.<p>

<b>Floors and Walls</b><p>

Because there are so many factors to consider when sizing a storage 
system, general rules of thumb can be misleading.  To show how the 
figures vary, a 6-inch thick concrete floor exposed to direct radiation 
requires 3 square feet of surface area for every square foot of window 
area, but an equally thick brick floor requires 5 square feet of surface 
area per square foot of window area.  The figures are different if the 
mass receives only reflected radiation (5 square feet for concrete and 9 
square feet for brick) or if the mass thickness varies in some places.<p>


Floors used for storage mass are usually poured concrete with a covering 
that is medium dark in color and has a non-glossy surface.  Using very 
dark colors on floors that are exposed to direct sunlight all day may 
result in overheating.  Ceramic tiles may be used over a concrete slab if 
the bonding material allows heat to be conducted to the floor.  Mortar 
and Portland cement conduct heat well; chemical glues and adhesives do 
not.  Other hard, dark colored floor covering such as sheet vinyl also 
works well.<p>

Sections of the floor that are exposed to direct sunlight should not be 
carpeted.  Area rugs or thin carpeting without padding may be used on 
other areas of the floor.  Carpeting large areas of a thermal storage 
floor will hinder the floor's ability to store and radiate heat back into 
the room.  It is also best to leave storage walls uncovered, although 
plaster or wallpaper will only slightly reduce performance. Materials 
that don't absorb heat should have light colored surfaces to reflect 
solar radiation toward storage areas.  It is important to place the 
storage mass where it will receive direct sunlight since mass heated 
indirectly by warm air requires four times as much area to store the same 
amount of heat as mass in direct sunlight.  Generally, it is better to 
spread a relatively thin amount of mass over a large area than to 
concentrate the mass in a few thick storage areas.<p>

<b>Trombe Walls</b><p>

The outside surface of the Trombe wall is painted a dark color to absorb 
heat.  In addition, a single or, preferably, a double layer of glazing is 
mounted about 4 inches in front of the wall.  Sunlight strikes the wall, 
charging it with heat which gradually migrates through the masonry. The 
heat reaches the room later in the day and radiates into the room through 
the night.<p>

Many Trombe walls have vents at the floor and ceiling.  While the sun 
shines, the heated air in the space between the glazing and the wall 
rises and enters the room through the upper vents.  This movement draws 
cooler air into the space through the lower vents.  To prevent this 
natural circulation of heat from reversing itself at night, backdraft 
dampers or manual louvers should be installed on the upper vent.  An 
insulating curtain or other types of movable insulation drawn between the 
glazing and the wall at night will reduce heat loss through the glazing.  
Vented Trouble walls are best for very cold climates where heating is 
required in the morning as well as at night.  If the vents are not 
carefully sized, overheating can easily be a problem.  In milder 
climates, or in households where no one is home during the day, unvented 
Trombe wall will provide heat in the evenings when it is most needed.<p>

A Trombe wall's surface area is equal to the window area.  The wall 
should be 8-16 inches thick.  The thicker the wall the longer it will 
take to transmit heat indoors.  The wall is usually made of concrete. In 
colder climates a selective surface foil should be applied to the outside 
face to enhance solar absorption and reduce the amount of infrared energy 
lost back through the glazing at night.<p>

Water-filled containers (Fiberglass stubs, 55-gallon metal drums, plastic 
or metal modules, etc.) can be used to create a water wall.  Water has 
about twice the heat storage capacity and one-fifth the weight of masonry 
of equivalent volume.  Also, water absorbs heat and transfers it by 
convection so rapidly that the water at any level is of uniform 
temperature.  Thus, heat will pass into the room at a much faster rate 
than for masonry walls of equal thickness.  This can lead to overheating 
problems unless the containers are 16-20 inches thick.  Keep in mind, 
however, that water does not readily convect downward. Consequently, the 
bottom of the container should have ample exposure to the sun to 
facilitate convection throughout the container.  Furthermore, a 
conventional wall placed behind the water wall for aesthetic reasons will 
impede the transfer of heat into the living area.  The containers can be 
painted a dark color to enhance absorption or, in the case of translucent 
containers, the water may be dyed a dark color. Leaving the water clear 
to allow extra light indoors is also an option.  In any situation, the 
water must be chemically treated to prevent algae or other biological 
growth within the container.<p>

When an attached sunspace is used to collect solar heat, the storage area 
can include the masonry floor of the sunspace, the wall separating the 
sunspace from the main building and water containers such as the 
55-gallon drums shown in the illustration on previous page.  The wall can 
be either masonry, water-filled containers, or containers filled with 
phase change materials, and it can include windows for heating the main 
living space with charging it with direct sunlight.<p>

<b>Storage in Active Systems</b><p>

In active solar heating systems the storage component is usually a large 
water tank or a rock bin housed in the basement or utility area.  Active 
system storage is linked to the solar collectors and to a mechanical heat 
distribution  system that uses pumps or air-handing units.<p>

If possible, storage bins or tanks should be located next to or under 
those rooms that require the greatest amount of heat.  The storage area 
should also be accessible for maintenance and repairs.<p>

<b>Air Systems</b><p>

Active solar air heating systems commonly use a bin filled with rocks for 
heat storage.  The rock bin stores heat when hot air from the solar 
collectors is blown through the rocks via a plenum at the top of the bin.  
The hot air is distributed evenly through the bin.  As the air reaches 
the bottom of the bin,the rocks have absorbed most of hits heat, and 
another plenum at the bottom returns it to the collectors for 
reheating.<p>

To retrieve the heat from the storage bin, house air is drawn into the 
lower plenum and blown upward through the rocks.  The warmed air is drawn 
off at the top of the bin and distributed to the house.  If the air is 
not warm enough, an auxiliary heater boosts its temperature before it is 
distributed.  If hot air from the collectors is available and is needed 
to heat the house directly, it bypasses the rock bin and flows directly 
into the heat distribution system.  Withdrawing and storing heat 
simultaneously is not practical since it takes energy to circulate air 
through the rock bins, and heat is lost during the distribution process. 
Likewise, an air system that heats both the house and the household water 
should bypass the bin in the summer to heat the water directly.  Heating 
the rock bin in order to preheat the water will add to the house's summer 
cooling load.<p>

Rock bins can be made from cinder block, concrete or wood.  When treated 
plywood is used for bin construction, it should be lined with 
plasterboard and a vapor barrier to protect the rocks and the entire 
system from any gases released by the plywood.  A wood bin should also be 
lined with a non-combustible material.  All bins must be tightly 
constructed and sealed to prevent air leakage from the storage bin.  Air 
leaks from the bin or the ducts drastically reduce the system's 
efficiency.  Sealing also prevents moisture, vermin and insects from 
entering.<p>

A storage bin works most efficiently when the rock depth is 5-7 feet and 
when there is an 8-inch separation between the bin and the rocks at the 
top and bottom.  Air should flow vertically through the system at the 
rate of 1-3 cubic feet per minute for each square foot of collector.  
Ducts should be sized for a velocity of 5-10 feet per second, and the 
rock bin should provide 1/2-1 cubic foot of storage for every square foot 
of collector.  This is roughly 2 1/2-3 times the volume of a water tank 
that would provide an equivalent storage capacity in a liquid system.  
The air flow rate is very important for optimum performance; consult 
other sources for detailed discussions of fan sizing.<p>

The plenums at the top and bottom of the bin ensure uniform air flow 
through the rock.  Air filters are needed between both of the plenums and 
the ducts to and from the bin to prevent dust from blowing into either 
the collectors or the house.  The filters should be inspected 
periodically and replaced when necessary.<p>

Dense rock, such as river rock (which is predominantly quartz), performs 
best.  The rocks should be of uniform size, roughly 3/4 inches-1 1/2 
inches in diameter.  Before the rocks are put in the bin, they must be 
washed to remove dirt and insect eggs.  Keeping the rocks dry will 
prevent problems with mold, mildew, and insects.<p>

Because of the weight of the rocks, the bin is usually located in the 
basement.  Outside underground bins are an option but are not recommended 
because they are difficult  to insulate and waterproof.  Ground water can 
ruin the insulation, corrode the walls of the bin, and promote the growth 
of mind and bacteria in the storage area if the waterproofing materials 
fail.  To reduce heat loss, an indoor bin should be insulated to a value 
of no less than R-19 (R-30 or greater if it is outside).  Insulate 
concrete bins on the inside to prevent heat from the rocks from sinking 
into the concrete where the heat cannot be efficiently recovered.  The 
ducts to and from the bin should be insulated to a value of at least 
R-16.<p>

<b>Liquid Systems</b><p>

Water is the most common heat storage medium in active systems that 
circulate liquid through collectors. The water in the tank is either 
heated directly by circulating through the collectors, or it is heated 
indirectly by a heat transfer fluid that circulates from storage to the 
collectors within a closed loop. In the latter instance, the transfer 
fluid absorbs heat from the collector and then passes through a heat 
exchanger immersed inside the storage tank which transfers heat to the 
water.  Because oxygen promotes corrosion, the heat exchanger should be 
completely submerged inside the tank.  If, as is usually the case, the 
system provides hot water for domestic use, the heat exchanger needs to 
be double-walled so that the heat transfer fluid cannot contaminate the 
drinking water.<p>

A general rule of thumb for water storage tanks is 1-2 1/2 gallons of 
water for every square foot of collector space.  The tanks can be made of 
concrete, steel or fiberglass reinforced plastic.  All should be 
insulated to a value of R-19 or more, and all piping to a value of R-4.  
The cost and availability of suitable tanks vary widely.<p>

Steel tanks should be lined to prevent corrosion.  For domestic water 
heating, steel tanks are available with glass or stone linings.  Epoxy or 
butyl rubber (for space heating only) can also be used as linings.  When 
lining a tank, carefully follow the manufacturer's recommendations.  It 
is especially important to consider the type of system, its volume and 
maximum temperature, and the wet versus dry temperature limitations of 
the liner material.  A rust inhibitor, such as disodium phosphate 
(Na2HPO4) can be used instead of a lining, but inhibitors degenerate and 
must be monitored regularly for pH balance.  If the pH is not what is 
specified by the manufacturer, the inhibitor must be replaced.  Concrete 
tanks, such as the ones used for septic systems, are sometimes used 
outdoors where steel is more likely to corrode.  Although concrete tanks 
are inexpensive and easy to install in retrofit projects, they are 
subject to seepage and must be water-proofed.  Leakage can also be a 
problem due to concrete's tendency to crack, poor workmanship or poor 
design.  Another drawback is that concrete tanks are only cost-effective 
for unpressurized systems. Fiberglass tanks are another option, although 
they cannot be used in a pressurized system.  As with other storage 
tanks, pay particular attention to its maximum temperature range.<p>

All tanks should be well insulated and have drains, as well as a means of 
access for routine maintenance such as cleaning heat exchangers.  Tanks 
also should be inspected for leaks before they are installed. They should 
not be built into the house's structure because they someday may need to 
be replaced. Temperature sensors for water storage tanks should be 
positioned for easy replacement.  If the local water is hard (i.e. has a 
high mineral content), a commercial water softener should be used to 
prevent problems with scaling (i.e. carbonate residue).<p>

Usually, for domestic hot water systems, a stone-lined tank with an 
immersed heat exchanger serves as a solar pre-heat tank.  It is installed 
between the potable water supply and regular hot water heater to form a 
two-tank system.  In the summer, the regular hot water heater can be 
bypassed since the solar collector usually generates enough hot water to 
meet a household's needs.  One-tank systems and other two-tank 
arrangements are also possible.
One-tank systems occupy less space and are more efficient if flow rates 
are closely controlled to prevent thermal mixing in the storage tank.  In 
a conventional water heater, the hot water rises in the tank and cold 
water moves to the bottom.  This natural stratification permits the 
hottest water to be drawn from the top of the tank.  In a solar storage 
tank, the water returning from the collector to the tank can disturb this 
stratification and mix the cold and warm layers.  Several methods prevent 
this: <p>

* inlet and outlet piping should enter the tank horizontally to prevent 
vertical mixing;<p>

* place a diffuser valve at the end of the return pipe;<p>

* maintain a low flowrate of less than 2 feet per second;<p>

* use a two-tank system, although this is an expensive option.<p>

Stratification does not increase efficiency in systems with quick tank 
turnover or in a buffer tank.<p>

<b>Radiant Slab Floors</b><p>

Concrete slab floors can replace or complement the heat storage component 
of air and liquid active solar energy systems.  Solar-heated air or 
liquid is circulated through channels or tubes embedded in the concrete 
slab.  The heated fluid transfers its heat to the concrete, which in turn 
radiates heat into the house.  Radiant slab floors heat people directly 
instead of the entire house air volume.  By heating the surrounding floor 
to 75-85 degrees F, the body feels comfortable even if the air 
temperature is only 55-60 degrees F. This reduces the amount of energy 
required to keep occupants comfortable, it produces no drafts and it 
concentrates the heat closer to the floor (as opposed to the ceiling 
where heat from forced air furnaces quickly ends up).  Furthermore, 
radiant slabs only require 80-125 degrees F heat which is the temperature 
range at which solar collectors perform most efficiently.  In 
liquid-charged systems, copper or polybutylene tubing is embedded in the 
concrete when it is poured.  Careful design is required to ensure that 
the proper amount of tubing is laid to sufficiently heat the home.  
Accurate operating controls are also required to activate the system 
several hours before heat is needed.<p>

Another design option is to place a gravel storage bed directly under a 
slab floor.  Heated air from the collectors (or a sunspace) circulates 
through the bed, heating the rocks and the slab floor.  Because the 
storage is adjacent to the living space, the requirements for sizing are 
more crucial than for regular rock beds.  For comfort, the floor 
temperature must be maintained between 60-72 degrees F.  This is usually 
accomplished by using a larger rock bed (4-5 cubic feet of rock per 
square foot of collector).  The distribution system must be designed so 
that the heated air reaches all parts of the storage bed in order to 
avoid hot spots in the floor above.  With this type of storage system, it 
is better to oversize the bin than to undersize it.<p>

<b>Hybrid Systems</b><p>

Elements of passive and active solar heating systems can be combined to 
create hybrid systems.  The most common example uses a sunspace collector 
(passive) linked to a rock storage bin (active) by way of fans and ducts.  
Hybrid systems offer more options to solar designers and builders and 
increase the overall versatility of solar heating technology.  For 
example, collectors and/or storage in hybrid systems do not need to be 
located directly in the main living spaces.  Interior walls, doors, and 
stairwells may be designed with less regard for free air movement that is 
required for a strictly passive system.  It is important not to mistake a 
situation where two separate systems are present - one active, the other 
passive - as being hybrid.  A system is considered hybrid only when 
components are mixed within a single system.<p>

<b>Phase Change Materials</b><p>

Phase change materials are another storage medium used in solar energy 
systems.  These are substances that store energy as latent heat.  Latent 
heat is the heat absorbed by a material as it changes phase, such as a 
solid changing to liquid at constant temperature (for example, the 
melting of ice or wax).  This heat is released again as the liquid 
returns to its solid form.  Phase change materials store 5-14 times more 
heat per unit volume than does water, masonry or rock.  They are 
frequently used where space restrictions limit larger storage mass units 
or to supplement storage mass in direct gain or sunspace passive systems 
where they are exposed to direct, full sunlight.<p>

The two most common types of phase change materials are calcium chloride 
hexahydrate and sodium decahydrate.  As a result of recent research, the 
long term stability of these products has been improved with 
additives.<p>

An important feature to consider is the type of container in which the 
phase change material is packaged. The packaging material should conduct 
heat well, be durable enough to withstand frequent changes in the storage 
material's volume as it changes phase, and should restrict the passage of 
water through the walls so the materials will not dry out.  Steel and 
polyethylene are common packaging materials.  Studies have found that 
1-inch thick containers perform best.  Situating these containers so warm 
air flows by both sides also increases performance.<p>

Phase change storage units are less common than conventional heat storage 
materials because they are more expensive and their storage capacities 
and characteristics are still being refined.<p>

<b>Where To Go From Here<p></b>

This fact sheet is intended to familiarize the consumer with the 
available solar heat storage options. However, if you are having a home 
built or are renovating an existing one, the actual design of a solar 
heat storage system requires professional assistance.  An improperly 
sized system will be less efficient and may make your house uncomfortable 
during much of the year.<p>


The service is operated by the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
Clearinghouse (EREC) for the U.S. Department of Energy.  The statements 
contained herein are based on information known to the Service at the 
time of printing.  No recommendations or endorsement of any product or 
service is implied by its mention here.  For more information, please 
contact the Service at 1-800-363-3732.

</body>
</html>
</DOC>