
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-62</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B025-146</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/freespeech/cc_ltr.html 205.177.10.31 19970215003014 text/html 13576
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:28:53 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Conservative Christian Letter/Proposal</title>
</head>
<body>

<pre>
October 16, 1995
 
The Honorable Thomas J. Bliley, Jr.  Chairman
Committee on Commerce
United States House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515
 
The Honorable Larry Pressler, Chairman
Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
United States Senate
Washington, DC 20510
 
 
Re: Computer Pornography Provisions in Telecommunications Bill
 
Dear Mr. Chairmen:
 
We are writing to urge the conference committee seeking to reconcile the
telecommunications bills passed by the House and Senate include in the
final bill the strongest possible criminal law provisions to address the
growing and immediate problem of computer pornography without any
exemptions, defenses, or political favors of any kind accorded to those
who knowingly participate in the distribution of obscenity to anyone or
indecency to children. While there is no perfect solution to the problem
of computer pornography, Congress could not hope to solve this problem by
holding liable only some who are responsible for the problem.
 
The recent Justice Department prosecution project targeting those who
violated federal child pornography law using America On-Line is
instructive in this regard. More than ninety individuals were targeted for
prosecution although many others, perhaps as many as 3,000 according to
one press report, were originally targeted by the Department of Justice as
potential violators of child pornography laws. Apparently due to a
shortage of investigative and prosecutorial resources, the project was
limited. Since there are insufficient resources to investigate and
prosecute but a fraction of those that are trafficking in child
pornography by computer, then there will likely be even fewer resources
available to investigate and prosecute those involved in obscenity and
indecency.
 
Thousands of individuals both in this country and abroad are regularly
placing obscenity and indecency on the Internet. It is not possible to
make anything more than a dent in the serious problem of computer
pornography if Congress is willing to hold liable only those who place
such material on the Internet while at the same time giving legal
exemptions or defenses to service or access providers who profit from and
are instrumental to the distribution of such material. The Justice
Department normally targest the major offenders of laws. In obscenity
cases prosecuted to date, it has targeted large companies which have been
responsible for the nationwide distribution of obscenity and who have made
large profits by violating federal laws. Prosecution of such companies has
made a substantial impact in curbing the distribution of obscenity, with
many such offenders going out of business altogether. So too will
prosecution of access providers which _knowingly_ traffic in obscenity
have a substantial impact, a far greater impact than just the prosecution
of a person who places one or a few prohibited images on the Internet.
Such a person could not traffic in pornography without the aid or
facilitation of the service or access providers. Indeed, if Congress
includes provisions protecting access or service providers in whatever
bill is finally passed, it is likely that most in this country who are
trafficking in indecency to children or obscenity would continue to do so
since the threat of prosecution would be minuscule, given the numbers of
those currently involved in this activity. It is also likely that those
outside our country who are engaged in these activities would continue to
do so since it would be nearly impossible to extradite them to the United
States for prosecution. Thus, unless all who knowingly participate in such
matters are subject to the law, the Internet will remain the same and
Congress will have failed in its responsibilities to the children and
families of America.
 
Federal law has traditionally assigned equal liability both for those who
commit a crime and those who aid and abet a crime. See Title 18 U.S.C.
Code Section 2: "(a) whoever [sic] commits an offense against the United
States or aids, abets, councils [sic], commands, induces, or procures its
commission, is punishable as a principle [sic]." Service or access
providers who knowingly participate in the distribution of indecency to
children or in obscenity to anyone are aiders and abettors in the
commission of those crimes and thus should have liability under any law
Congress passes. Current federal law on child pornography provides no no
exemption or defense for access providers. Thus, the child pornography law
provides a strong deterrent against trafficking in child pornography for
those who would otherwise knowingly participate in its distribution by
computer whether pedophile or access provider.
 
The changes in law which we support would not hold an access provider
criminally liable for all illegal pornography on the Internet which their
services may be used to obtain. Nor would it require that access providers
check all communications to ensure that no violations of the law are
occurring. They would simply be required to avoid knowing violations of
the law. This is an obligation imposed on all citizens. Technology exists
today for access providers, through a simple process, to target or flag
and remove files containing objectionable material.
 
We support the House-passed language insofar as it addresses obscenity by
amendment Title 18, Sections 1462, 1465, and 1467 of the United States
Code. The provision restricting transmission of indecency in the House-passed
bill, an amendment to Section 1465, is inadequate, and we urge that it be
substantially revised.
 
Attached is the specific language we support which includes the House
passed language on obscenity and includes revisions on both the House
passed language on indecency, which would amend Title 18 and the
Senate-passed language on indecency, which would amend Title 47. The
combination of these provisions, we believe, would provide effective laws
to curb obscenity and indecency on the Internet by establishing that all
who knowingly participate in the distribution or facilitation of obscenity
to anyone or indecency to children would be subject to the law.
 
Thank you for your concern and attention to this matter.
 
 
[signed]
 
Edwin Meese III
 
Ralph Reed
Christian Coalition
 
Donald E. Wildmon
American Family Association
 
Alan Sears, Former Executive Director
Atty General's Commission on Pornography
 
Phyllis Shafly
Eagle Forum
 
Beverly LaHaye
Concerned Women for America
 
Reverend Louis P. Sheldon
Traditional Values Coalition
 
Jay Sekulow
American Center for Law and Justice
 
Paul Weyrich
Free Congress Foundation
 
Paul McGeady
Morality in Media
 
Len Munsil
National Family Legal Foundation
 
Robert Peters
Morality in Media
 
Kenneth Sukhia
Former United States Attorney, N.D., FL
Former Chairman, Atty General's Advisory Committee
Subcommittee on Child Exploitation and Obscenity


--------------------------

 
Section 1465 of Title 18, United States Code, is amended to punish
distribution by computer of indecent material to minors by adding at the
end the following:
 
Whoever knowingly communicates, transmits, or makes available for
communication or transmission, in or effecting interstate or foreign
commerce an indecent communication by computer to any person the
communicator or transmitter believes has not attained the age of 18 years
of age, knowing that such communication will be obtained by a person
believed to be under 18 years of age, shall be fined under this title or
imprisoned not more than five years, or both.
 
TITLE IV -- OBSCENE, HARASSING, AND WRONGFUL UTILIZATION OF
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
 
SEC. 401. SHORT TITLE
         This title may be cited as the "Communications Decency Act of
1995".
 
Sec. 402. OBSCENE OR HARASSING USE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES UNDER
THE COMMUNICATIONS ACT OF 1934
 
Section 223 (47 U.S.C. 223) is amended --
   (1) by striking subsection (a) and inserting in lieu of [sic]:
 ``(a) Whoever--
    ``(1) in the District of Columbia or in interstate or foreign
communications --
        ``(A) by means of telecommunications device knowingly--
          ``(i) makes, creates, or solicits, and
          ``(ii) initiates the transmission of,
     any comment, request, suggestion, proposal, image, or other
     communication which is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy, or
     indecent, with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass
     another person;
         ``(B) makes a telephone call or utilizes a
     telecommunications device, whether or not conversation or
     communication ensues, without disclosing his identity and
     with intent to annoy, abuse, threaten, or harass any person
     at the called number or who receives the communication;
         ``(C) makes or causes the telephone of another repeatedly
     or continuously to ring, with intent to harass any person at
     the called number; or
         ``(D) makes repeated telephone calls or repeatedly
     initiates communication with a telecommunications device,
     during which conversation or communication ensues, solely to
     harass any person at the called number or who receives the
     communication;
      ``(2) knowingly permits any telecommunications facility
     under his control to be used for any activity prohibited by
     paragraph (1) with the intent that it be used for
     such activity,
 
  shall be fined not more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more
  than two years, or both.''; and
 
   (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 
 ``(d) Whoever--
       ``(1) knowingly within the United States or in foreign
     communications with the United States by means of
     telecommunications device makes or makes available any
     indecent communication in any form including any comment,
     request, suggestion, proposal, or image, to any person under
     18 years of age regardless of whether the
     maker of such communication placed the call or initiated the
     communication; or
       ``(2) knowingly permits any telecommunications facility
     under such person's control to be used for an activity
     prohibited by paragraph (1) with the intent that it be
     used for such activity,
  shall be fined not more than $100,000 or imprisoned not more
  than two years or both.
      ``(e) Defenses to subsections (a) and (d), restrictions on 
     access, judicial remedies respecting restrictions for
     persons providing information services and
     access to information services--
      "(1) It is a defense to prosecution that a person has complied
     with regulations designed to restrict access to indecent
     communications to those 18 years old or older as enacted by the
     Federal Communications Commission which shall prepare final 
     regulations within 120 days of the passage of this bill. Until
     such regulations become effective, it is a defense to
     prosecution that the person has blocked or restricted access
     to indecent communications to any person under 18 years
     of age through the use of verified credit card, adult access
     code, or adult personal identification number (PIN).   
     Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to treat
     enhanced information services as common carriage."
       "(2) No cause of action may be brought in any
     court or any administrative agency against any person on account
     of any activity which is not in violation of any law punishable
     by criminal or civil penalty, which activity the person has taken in
     good faith to implement a defense authorized under this section or
     otherwise to restrict or prevent the transmission of, or access to,
     a communication specified in this section.
     (f) Nothing in this subsection shall preclude any State or
     local government from enacting and enforcing laws and regulations
     which do not result in the imposition of inconsistent obligations on
     the provision of interstate services.  Nothing in this subsection
     shall preclude any State or local government from governing conduct
     not covered by subsection (d)(2)."
     (g) Nothing in subsection (a), (d), or (e) or in the
     defenses to prosecution under (e) shall be construed
     to affect or limit the application or enforcement of any other
     Federal law.
     (h) The use of the term 'telecommunications device' in this
     section shall not impose new obligations on (one-way) broadcast
     radio or (one-way) broadcast television operators licensed by the
     Commission or (one-way) cable services registered with the
     Federal Communications Commission and covered by obscenity and
     indecency provisions elsewhere in this Act.
 
Sec. 403. OBSCENE PROGRAMMING ON CABLE TELEVISION.
 
        Section 639 (47 U.S.C. 559) is amended by striking "10,000" and
inserting "$100,000"
 
Sec. 404. BROADCASTING OBSCENE LANGUAGE ON THE RADIO.
 
        Section 1466 of Title 18, United States Code, is amended by
striking out "$10,000" and inserting "$100,000".
 
Sec. 405 SEPARABILITY
 
        "(a) If any provision of this Title, including amendments to this
Title of [sic] the application thereof to any person or circumstance is
held invalid, the remainder of this Title and the application of such
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby."

</pre>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>