
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B12-32</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B044-290</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.063.html 130.91.195.242 19970122061509 text/html 58920
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:14:59 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 58748
Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:48 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<TITLE>Selling Wine Without Bottles, by John Perry Barlow</TITLE>
<H1>Selling Wine Without Bottles</H1>

<I>The Economy of Mind on the Global Net
<BR>by John Perry Barlow</I>

<HR> 
<BLOCKQUOTE>
   If nature has made any one thing less susceptible than
   all others of exclusive property, it is the action of the
   thinking power called an idea, which an individual may
   exclusively possess as long as he keeps it to himself;
   but the moment it is divulged, it forces itself into the
   possession of everyone, and the receiver cannot
   dispossess himself of it. Its peculiar character, too, is
   that no one possesses the less, because every other
   possesses the whole of it. He who receives an idea from
   me, receives instruction himself without lessening mine;
   as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light
   without darkening me. That ideas should freely spread
   from one to another over the globe, for the moral and
   mutual instruction of man, and improvement of his
   condition, seems to have been peculiarly and benevolently
   designed by nature, when she made them, like fire,
   expansible over all space, without lessening their
   density at any point, and like the air in which we
   breathe, move, and have our physical being, incapable of
   confinement or exclusive appropriation.  Inventions then
   cannot, in nature, be a subject of property. <p>

<PRE>                          -- Thomas Jefferson</PRE><p>
</BLOCKQUOTE>

<hr> <p>

Throughout the time I've been groping around Cyberspace, there has
remained unsolved an immense conundrum that seems to be at the root of
nearly every legal, ethical, governmental, and social vexation to be
found in the Virtual World. I refer to the problem of digitized
property. <p>

The riddle is this: if our property can be infinitely reproduced and
instantaneously distributed all over the planet without cost, without
our knowledge, without its even leaving our possession, how can we
protect it? How are we going to get paid for the work we do with our
minds? And, if we can't get paid, what will assure the continued
creation and distribution of such work? <p>

Since we don't have a solution to what is a profoundly new kind of
challenge, and are apparently unable to delay the galloping
digitization of everything not obstinately physical, we are sailing
into the future on a sinking ship. <p>

This vessel, the accumulated canon of copyright and patent law, was
developed to convey forms and methods of expression entirely different
from the vaporous cargo it is now being asked to carry. It is leaking
as much from within as without. <p>

Legal efforts to keep the old boat floating are taking three forms: a
frenzy of deck chair rearrangement, stern warnings to the passengers
that if she goes down, they will face harsh criminal penalties, and
serene, glassy-eyed denial. <p>

Intellectual property law cannot be patched, retrofitted, or expanded
to contain the gasses of digitized expression any more than real
estate law might be revised to cover the allocation of broadcasting
spectrum. (Which, in fact, rather resembles what is being attempted
here.) We will need to develop an entirely new set of methods as
befits this entirely new set of circumstances. <p>

Most of the people who actually create soft property--the programmers,
hackers, and Net surfers--already know this. Unfortunately, neither
the companies they work for nor the lawyers these companies hire have
enough direct experience with immaterial goods to understand why they
are so problematic. They are proceeding as though the old laws can
somehow be made to work, either by grotesque expansion or by force.
They are wrong. <p>

The source of this conundrum is as simple as its solution is complex.
Digital technology is detaching information from the physical plane,
where property law of all sorts has always found definition. <p>

Throughout the history of copyrights and patents, the proprietary
assertions of thinkers have been focused not on their ideas but on the
expression of those ideas. The ideas themselves, as well as facts
about the phenomena of the world, were considered to be the collective
property of humanity. One could claim franchise, in the case of
copyright, on the precise turn of phrase used to convey a particular
idea or the order in which facts were presented. <p>

The point at which this franchise was imposed was that moment when the
"word became flesh" by departing the mind of its originator and
entering some physical object, whether book or widget. The subsequent
arrival of other commercial media besides books didn't alter the legal
importance of this moment. Law protected expression and, with few (and
recent) exceptions, to express was to make physical. <p>

Protecting physical expression had the force of convenience on its
side. Copyright worked well because, Gutenberg notwithstanding, it was
hard to make a book.  Furthermore, books froze their contents into a
condition that was as challenging to alter as it was to reproduce.
Counterfeiting or distributing counterfeit volumes were obvious and
visible activities, easy enough to catch somebody in the act of doing.
Finally, unlike unbounded words or images, books had material surfaces
to which one could attach copyright notices, publisher's marques, and
price tags. <p>

Mental to physical conversion was even more central to patent. A
patent, until recently, was either a description of the form into
which materials were to be rendered in the service of some purpose or
a description of the process by which rendition occurred. In either
case, the conceptual heart of patent was the material result. If no
purposeful object could be rendered due to some material limitation,
the patent was rejected. Neither a Klein bottle nor a shovel made of
silk could be patented. It had to be a thing and the thing had to
work. <p>

Thus the rights of invention and authorship adhered to activities in
the physical world.  One didn't get paid for ideas but for the ability
to deliver them into reality.  For all practical purposes, the value
was in the conveyance and not the thought conveyed. <p>

In other words, the bottle was protected, not the wine. <p>

Now, as information enters Cyberspace, the native home of Mind, these
bottles are vanishing. With the advent of digitization, it is now
possible to replace all previous information storage forms with one
meta-bottle: complex--and highly liquid--patterns of ones and zeros. <p>

Even the physical/digital bottles to which we've become accustomed,
floppy disks, CD- ROM's, and other discrete, shrink-wrappable
bit-packages, will disappear as all computers jack in to the global
Net. While the Internet may never include every single CPU on the
planet, it is more than doubling every year and can be expected to
become the principal medium of information conveyance if, eventually,
the only one. <p>

Once that has happened, all the goods of the Information Age--all of
expressions once contained in books or film strips or records or
newsletters--will exist either as pure thought or something very much
like thought: voltage conditions darting around the Net at the speed
of light, in conditions which one might behold in effect, as glowing
pixels or transmitted sounds, but never touch or claim to "own" in the
old sense of the word. <p>

Some might argue that information will still require some physical
manifestation, such as its magnetic existence on the titanic hard
disks of distant servers, but these are bottles that have no
macroscopically discrete or personally meaningful form. <p>

Some will also argue that we have been dealing with unbottled
expression since the advent of radio, and they would be right. But for
most of the history of broadcast, there was no convenient way to
capture soft goods from the electromagnetic ether and reproduce them
in anything like the quality available in commercial packages. Only
recently has this changed and little has been done legally or
technically to address the change. <p>

Generally, the issue of consumer payment for broadcast products was
irrelevant. The consumers themselves were the product.  Broadcast
media were supported either by selling the attention of their audience
to advertisers, using government to assess payment through taxes, or
the whining mendicancy of annual donor drives. <p>

All of broadcast support models are flawed. Support either by
advertisers or government has almost invariably tainted the purity of
the goods delivered. Besides, direct marketing is gradually killing
the advertiser support model anyway. <p>

Broadcast media gave us another payment method for a virtual product
in the royalties which broadcasters pay songwriters through such
organizations as ASCAP and BMI.  But, as a member of ASCAP, I can
assure you this is not a model that we should emulate.  The monitoring
methods are wildly approximate. There is no parallel system of
accounting in the revenue stream. It doesn't really work. Honest. <p>

In any case, without our old methods of physically defining the
expression of ideas, and in the absence of successful new models for
non-physical transaction, we simply don't know how to assure reliable
payment for mental works. To make matters worse, this comes at a time
when the human mind is replacing sunlight and mineral deposits as the
principal source of new wealth. <p>

Furthermore, the increasing difficulty of enforcing existing copyright
and patent laws is already placing in peril the ultimate source of
intellectual property, the free exchange of ideas. <p>

That is, when the primary articles of commerce in a society look so
much like speech as to be indistinguishable from it, and when the
traditional methods of protecting their ownership have become
ineffectual, attempting to fix the problem with broader and more
vigorous enforcement will inevitably threaten freedom of speech. <p>

The greatest constraint on your future liberties may come not from
government but from corporate legal departments laboring to protect by
force what can no longer be protected by practical efficiency or
general social consent. <p>

Furthermore, when Jefferson and his fellow creatures of The
Enlightenment designed the system that became American copyright law,
their primary objective was assuring the widespread distribution of
thought, not profit. Profit was the fuel that would carry ideas into
the libraries and minds of their new republic. Libraries would
purchase books, thus rewarding the authors for their work in
assembling ideas, which otherwise "incapable of confinement" would
then become freely available to the public. But what is the role of
libraries if there are no books? How does society now pay for the
distribution of ideas if not by charging for the ideas themselves? <p>

Additionally complicating the matter is the fact that along with the
physical bottles in which intellectual property protection has
resided, digital technology is also erasing the legal jurisdictions of
the physical world, and replacing them with the unbounded and perhaps
permanently lawless seas of Cyberspace. <p>

In Cyberspace, there are not only no national or local boundaries to
contain the scene of a crime and determine the method of its
prosecution, there are no clear cultural agreements on what a crime
might be. Unresolved and basic differences between European and Asian
cultural assumptions about intellectual property can only be
exacerbated in a region where many transactions are taking place in
both hemispheres and yet, somehow, in neither. <p>

Even in the most local of digital conditions, jurisdiction and
responsibility are hard to assess. A group of music publishers filed
suit against Compuserve this fall for it having allowed its users to
upload musical compositions into areas where other users might get
them. But since Compuserve cannot practically exercise much control
over the flood of bits that pass between its subscribers, it probably
shouldn't be held responsible for unlawfully "publishing" these works. <p>

Notions of property, value, ownership, and the nature of wealth itself
are changing more fundamentally than at any time since the Sumerians
first poked cuneiform into wet clay and called it stored grain. Only a
very few people are aware of the enormity of this shift and fewer of
them are lawyers or public officials. <p>

Those who do see these changes must prepare responses for the legal
and social confusion that will erupt as efforts to protect new forms
of property with old methods become more obviously futile, and, as a
consequence, more adamant. <p>

<H2>From Swords To Writs To Bits</H2>

Humanity now seems bent on creating a world economy primarily based on
goods that take no material form.  In doing so, we may be eliminating
any predictable connection between creators and a fair reward for the
utility or pleasure others may find in their works. <p>

Without that connection, and without a fundamental change in
consciousness to accommodate its loss, we are building our future on
furor, litigation, and institutionalized evasion of payment except in
response to raw force. We may return to the Bad Old Days of property. <p>

Throughout the darker parts of human history, the possession and
distribution of property was a largely military matter. "Ownership"
was assured those with the nastiest tools, whether fists or armies,
and the most resolute will to use them. Property was the divine right
of thugs. <p>

By the turn of the First Millennium A.D., the emergence of merchant
classes and landed gentry forced the development of ethical
understandings for the resolution of property disputes. In the late
Middle Ages, enlightened rulers like England's Henry II began to
codify this unwritten "common law" into recorded canons. These laws
were local, but this didn't matter much as they were primarily
directed at real estate, a form of property that is local by
definition. And which, as the name implied, was very real. <p>

This continued to be the case as long as the origin of wealth was
agricultural, but with dawning of the Industrial Revolution, humanity
began to focus as much on means as ends. Tools acquired a new social
value and, thanks to their own development, it became possible to
duplicate and distribute them in quantity. <p>

To encourage their invention, copyright and patent law were developed
in most western countries. These laws were devoted to the delicate
task of getting mental creations into the world where they could be
used--and enter the minds of others--while assuring their inventors
compensation for the value of their use.  And, as previously stated,
the systems of both law and practice that grew up around that task
were based on physical expression. <p>

Since it is now possible to convey ideas from one mind to another
without ever making them physical, we are now claiming to own ideas
themselves and not merely their expression. And since it is likewise
now possible to create useful tools that never take physical form. we
have taken to patenting abstractions, sequences of virtual events, and
mathematical formulae--the most un-real estate imaginable. <p>

In certain areas, this leaves rights of ownership in such an ambiguous
condition that once again property adheres to those who can muster the
largest armies. The only difference is that this time the armies
consist of lawyers. <p>

Threatening their opponents with the endless Purgatory of litigation,
over which some might prefer death itself, they assert claim to any
thought that might have entered another cranium within the collective
body of the corporations they serve. They act as though these ideas
appeared in splendid detachment from all previous human thought.  And
they pretend that thinking about a product is somehow as good as
manufacturing, distributing, and selling it. <p>

What was previously considered a common human resource, distributed
among the minds and libraries of the world, as well as the phenomena
of nature herself, is now being fenced and deeded. It is as though a
new class of enterprise had arisen which claimed to own air and water. <p>

What is to be done? While there is a certain grim fun to be had in it,
dancing on the grave of copyright and patent will solve little,
especially when so few are willing to admit that the occupant of this
grave is even deceased and are trying to up by force what can no
longer be upheld by popular consent. <p>

The legalists, desperate over their slipping grip, are vigorously
trying to extend it.  Indeed, the United States and other proponents
of GATT are making are making adherence to our moribund systems of
intellectual property protection a condition of membership in the
marketplace of nations. For example, China will be denied Most Favored
nation trading status unless they agree to uphold a set of culturally
alien principles that are no longer even sensibly applicable in their
country of origin. <p>

In a more perfect world, we'd be wise to declare a moratorium on
litigation, legislation, and international treaties in this area until
we had a clearer sense of the terms and conditions of enterprise in
Cyberspace. Ideally, laws ratify already developed social consensus.
They are less the Social Contract itself than a series of memoranda
expressing a collective intent that has emerged out of many millions
of human interactions. <p>

Humans have not inhabited Cyberspace long enough or in sufficient
diversity to have developed a Social Contract that conforms to the
strange new conditions of that world.  Laws developed prior to
consensus usually serve the already established few who can get them
passed and not society as a whole. <p>

To the extent that either law or established social practice exists in
this area, they are already in dangerous disagreement. The laws
regarding unlicensed reproduction of commercial software are clear and
stern...and rarely observed. Software piracy laws are so practically
unenforceable and breaking them has become so socially acceptable that
only a thin minority appears compelled, either by fear or conscience,
to obey them. <p>

I sometimes give speeches on this subject, and I always ask how many
people in the audience can honestly claim to have no unauthorized
software on their hard disks. I've never seen more than ten percent of
the hands go up. <p>

Whenever there is such profound divergence between the law and social
practice, it is not society that adapts. And, against the swift tide
of custom, the Software Publishers' current practice of hanging a few
visible scapegoats is so obviously capricious as to only further
diminish respect for the law. <p>

Part of the widespread popular disregard for commercial software
copyrights stems from a legislative failure to understand the
conditions into which it was inserted. To assume that systems of law
based in the physical world will serve in an environment that is as
fundamentally different as Cyberspace is a folly for which everyone
doing business in the future will pay. <p>

As I will discuss in the next segment, unbounded intellectual property
is very different from physical property and can no longer be
protected as though these differences did not exist. For example, if
we continue to assume that value is based on scarcity, as it is with
regard to physical objects, we will create laws that are precisely
contrary to the nature of information, which may, in many cases,
increase in value with distribution. <p>

The large, legally risk-averse institutions most likely to play by the
old rules will suffer for their compliance. The more lawyers, guns,
and money they invest in either protecting their rights or subverting
those of their opponents, the more commercial competition will
resemble the Kwakiutl Potlatch Ceremony, in which adversaries competed
by destroying their own possessions. Their ability to produce new
technology will simply grind to a halt as every move they make drives
them deeper into a tar pit of courtroom warfare. <p>

Faith in law will not be an effective strategy for high tech
companies. Law adapts by continuous increments and at a pace second
only to geology in its stateliness.  Technology advances in the
lunging jerks, like the punctuation of biological evolution
grotesquely accelerated. Real world conditions will continue to change
at a blinding pace, and the law will get further behind, more
profoundly confused. This mismatch is permanent. <p>

Promising economies based on purely digital products will either be
born in a state of paralysis, as appears to be the case with
multimedia, or continue in a brave and willful refusal by their owners
to play the ownership game at all. <p>

In the United States one can already see a parallel economy
developing, mostly among small fast moving enterprises who protect
their ideas by getting into the marketplace quicker then their larger
competitors who base their protection on fear and litigation. <p>

Perhaps those who are part of the problem will simply quarantine
themselves in court while those who are part of the solution will
create a new society based, at first, on piracy and freebooting. It
may be that when the current system of intellectual property law has
collapsed, as seems inevitable, that no new legal structure will arise
in its place. <p>

But something will happen. After all, people do business. When a
currency becomes meaningless, business is done in barter. When
societies develop outside the law, they develop their own unwritten
codes, practices, and ethical systems. While technology may undo law,
technology offers methods for restoring creative rights. <p>

<H2>A Taxonomy Of Information</H2>

It seems to me that the most productive thing to do now is to look
hard into the true nature of what we're trying to protect.  How much
do we really know about information and its natural behaviors? <p>

What are the essential characteristics of unbounded creation? How does
it differ from previous forms of property? How many of our assumptions
about it have actually been about its containers rather than their
mysterious contents? What are its different species and how does each
of them lend itself to control? What technologies will be useful in
creating new virtual bottles to replace the old physical ones? <p>

Of course, information is, by its nature, intangible and hard to
define. Like other such deep phenomena as light or matter, it is a
natural host to paradox. And as it is most helpful to understand light
as being both a particle and a wave, an understanding of information
may emerge in the abstract congruence of its several different
properties that might be described by the following three statements: <p>

<UL>
<LI> Information is an activity.
<LI> Information is a life form.
<LI> Information is a relationship.
</UL>

In the following section, I will examine each of these. <p>

<H3>Information Is An Activity</H3>

<H4>Information Is a Verb, Not a Noun.</H4>

Freed of its containers, information is obviously not a thing. In
fact, it is something that happens in the field of interaction between
minds or objects or other pieces of information. <p>

Gregory Bateson, expanding on the information theory of Claude
Shannon, said, "Information is a difference which makes a difference."
Thus, information only really exists in the Æ [delta]. The making
of that difference is an activity within a relationship.  Information
is an action that occupies time rather than a state of being which
occupies physical space, as is the case with hard goods. It is the
pitch, not the baseball, the dance, not the dancer. <p>

<H4>Information Is Experienced, Not Possessed</H4>

Even when it has been encapsulated in some static form like a book or
a hard disk, information is still something that happens to you as you
mentally decompress it from its storage code. But, whether it's
running at gigabits per second or words per minute, the actual
decoding is a process that must be performed by and upon a mind, a
process that must take place in time. <p>

There was a cartoon in the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists a few years
ago which illustrated this point beautifully. In the drawing, a holdup
man trains his gun on the sort of bespectacled fellow you'd figure
might have a lot of information stored in his head.  "Quick," orders
the bandit, "Give me all your ideas." <p>

<H4>Information Has To Move</H4>

Sharks are said to die of suffocation if they stop swimming, and the
same is nearly true of information. Information that isn't moving
ceases to exist as anything but potential...at least until it is
allowed to move again. For this reason, the practice of information
hoarding, common in bureaucracies, is an especially wrong-headed
artifact of physically based value systems. <p>

<H4>Information is Conveyed by Propagation, Not Distribution</H4>


The way in which information spreads is also very different from the
distribution of physical goods. It moves more like something from
nature than from a factory. It can concatenate like falling dominos or
grow in the usual fractal lattice, like frost spreading on a window,
but it cannot be shipped around like widgets, except to the extent
that it can be contained in them. It doesn't simply move on. It leaves
a trail of itself everywhere it's been. <p>

The central economic distinction between information and physical
property is the ability of information to be transferred without
leaving the possession of the original owner. If I sell you my horse,
I can't ride him after that. If I sell you what I know, we both know
it. <p>

<H3>Information Is A Life Form</H3>

<H4>Information wants to be free.</H4>


Stewart Brand is generally credited with this elegant statement of the
obvious, recognizing both the natural desire of secrets to be told and
the fact that they might be capable of possessing something like a
"desire" in the first place. <p>

English Biologist and Philosopher Richard Dawkins proposed the idea of
"memes," self- replicating, patterns of information that propagate
themselves across the ecologies of mind, saying they were like life
forms. <p>

I believe they are life forms in every respect but a basis in the
carbon atom. They self- reproduce, they interact with their
surroundings and adapt to them, they mutate, they persist. Like any
other life form they evolve to fill the possibility spaces of their
local environments, which are, in this case the surrounding belief
systems and cultures of their hosts, namely, us. <p>

Indeed, the sociobiologists like Dawkins make a plausible case that
carbon-based life forms are information as well, that, as the chicken
is an egg's way of making another egg, the entire biological spectacle
is just the DNA molecule's means of copying out more information
strings exactly like itself. <p>

<H4>Information Replicates into the Cracks of Possibility</H4>

Like DNA helices, ideas are relentless expansionists, always seeking
new opportunities for lebensraum. And, as in carbon-based nature, the
more robust organisms are extremely adept at finding new places to
live. Thus, just as the common housefly has insinuated itself into
practically every ecosystem on the planet, so has the meme of "life
after death" found a niche in most minds, or psycho-ecologies. <p>

The more universally resonant an idea or image or song, the more minds
it will enter and remain within. Trying to stop the spread of a really
robust piece of information is about as easy as keeping killer bees
South of the Border.  The stuff just leaks. <p>

<H4>Information Wants To Change</H4>


If ideas and other interactive patterns of information are indeed life
forms, they can be expected to evolve constantly into forms that will
be more perfectly adapted to their surroundings. And, as we see, they
are doing this all the time. <p>

But for a long time, our static media, whether carvings in stone, ink
on paper, or dye on celluloid, have strongly resisted the evolutionary
impulse, exalting as a consequence the author's ability to determine
the finished product.  But, as in an oral tradition, digitized
information has no "final cut." <p>

Digital information, unconstrained by packaging, is a continuing
process more like the metamorphosing tales of prehistory than anything
that will fit in shrink wrap. From the Neolithic to Gutenberg,
information was passed on, mouth to ear, changing with every
re-telling (or re-singing). The stories that once shaped our sense of
the world didn't have authoritative versions. They adapted to each
culture in which they found themselves being told. <p>

Because there was never a moment when the story was frozen in print,
the so-called "moral" right of storytellers to keep the tale their own
was neither protected nor recognized. The story simply passed through
each of them on its way to the next, where it would assume a different
form. As we return to continuous information, we can expect the
importance of authorship to diminish. Creative people may have to
renew their acquaintance with humility. <p>

But our system of copyright makes no accommodation whatever for
expressions that don't at some point become "fixed" nor for cultural
expressions which lack a specific author or inventor. <p>

Jazz improvisations, standup comedy routines, mime performances,
developing monologues, and unrecorded broadcast transmissions all lack
the Constitutional requirement of fixation as a "writing.Ò Without
being fixed by a point of publicatoin the liquid works of the future
will all look more like these continuously adapting and changing forms
and will therefore exist beyond the reach of copyright. <p>

Copyright expert Pamela Samuelson tells of having attended a
conference last year convened around the fact that Western countries
may legally appropriate the music, designs, and biomedical lore of
aboriginal people without compensation to their tribe of origin since
that tribe is not an "author" or "inventor." <p>

But soon most information will be generated collaboratively by the
cyber-tribal hunter- gatherers of Cyberspace. Our arrogant legal
dismissal of the rights of "primitives" will be back to haunt us soon. <p>

<H4>Information is Perishable</H4>


With the exception of the rare classic, most information is like farm
produce. Its quality degrades rapidly both over time and in distance
from the source of production. But even here, value is highly
subjective and conditional. Yesterday's papers are quite valuable to
the historian. In fact, the older they are, the more valuable they
become. On the other hand, a commodities broker might consider news of
an event that is more than an hour old to have lost any relevance. <p>

<H3>Information Is A Relationship</H3>

<H4>Meaning Has Value and Is Unique to Each Case</H4>

In most cases, we assign value to information based on its
meaningfulness. The place where information dwells, the holy moment
where transmission becomes reception, is a region that has many
shifting characteristics and flavors depending on the relationship of
sender and receiver, the depth of their interactivity. <p>

Each such relationship is unique. Even in cases where the sender is a
broadcast medium, and no response is returned, the receiver is hardly
passive. Receiving information is often as creative an act as
generating it. <p>

The value of what is sent depends entirely on the extent to which each
individual receiver has the receptors...shared terminology, attention,
interest, language, paradigm...necessary to render what is received
meaningful. <p>

Understanding is a critical element increasingly overlooked in the
effort to turn information into a commodity. Data may be any set of
facts, useful or not, intelligible or inscrutable, germane or
irrelevant. Computers can crank out new data all night long without
human help, and the results may be offered for sale as information.
They may or may not actually be so. Only a human being can recognize
the meaning that separates information from data. <p>

In fact, information, in the economic sense of the word, consists of
data that have been passed through a particular human mind and found
meaningful within that mental context. One fella's information is all
just data to someone else. If you're an anthropologist, my detailed
charts of Tasaday kinship patterns might be critical information to
you. If you're a banker from Hong Kong, they might barely seem to be
data. <p>

<H4>Familiarity Has More Value Than Scarcity</H4>


With physical goods, there is a direct correlation between scarcity
and value. Gold is more valuable than wheat, even though you can't eat
it. While this is not always the case, the situation with information
is usually precisely the reverse. Most soft goods increase in value as
they become more common. Familiarity is an important asset in the
world of information. It may often be the case that the best thing you
can do to raise the demand for your product is to give it away. <p>

While this has not always worked with shareware, it could be argued
that there is a connection between the extent to which commercial
software is pirated and the amount that gets sold. Broadly pirated
software, such as Lotus 1-2-3 or WordPerfect, becomes a standard and
benefits from Law of Increasing Returns based on familiarity. <p>

Regarding my own soft product, rock and roll songs, there is no
question that the band I write them for, the Grateful Dead, has
increased its popularity enormously by giving them away. We have been
letting people tape our concerts since the early seventies, but
instead of reducing the demand for our product, we are now the largest
concert draw in America, a fact that is at least in part attributable
to the popularity generated by those tapes. <p>

True, I don't get any royalties on the millions of copies of my songs
that have been extracted from concerts, but I see no reason to
complain. The fact is, no one but the Grateful Dead can perform a
Grateful Dead song, so if you want the experience and not its thin
projection, you have to buy a ticket from us. In other words, our
intellectual property protection derives from our being the only
real-time source of it. <p>

<H4>Exclusivity Has Value</H4>


The problem with a model that turns the physical scarcity/value ratio
on its head is that sometimes the value of information is very much
based on its scarcity. Exclusive possession of certain facts makes
them more useful. If everyone knows about conditions that might drive
a stock price up, the information is valueless. <p>

But again, the critical factor is usually time. It doesn't matter if
this kind of information eventually becomes ubiquitous. What matters
is being among the first who possess it and act on it. While potent
secrets usually don't stay secret, they may remain so long enough to
advance the cause of their original holders. <p>

<H4>Point of View and Authority Have Value</H4>


In a world of floating realities and contradictory maps, rewards will
accrue to those commentators whose maps seem to fit their territory
snugly, based on their ability to yield predictable results for those
who use them. <p>

In aesthetic information, whether poetry or rock 'n' roll, people are
willing to buy the new product of an artist, sight-unseen, based on
their having been delivered a pleasurable experience by previous work. <p>

Reality is an edit. People are willing to pay for the authority of
those editors whose filtering point of view seems to fit best. And
again, point of view is an asset that cannot be stolen or duplicated.
No one but Esther Dyson sees the world as she does and the handsome
fee she charges for her newsletter is actually for the privilege of
looking at the world through her unique eyes. <p>

<H4>Time Replaces Space</H4>


In the physical world, value depends heavily on possession, or
proximity in space. One owns that material that falls inside certain
dimensional boundaries and the ability to act directly, exclusively,
and as one wishes upon what falls inside those boundaries is the
principal right of ownership. And of course there is the relationship
between value and scarcity, a limitation in space. <p>

In the virtual world, proximity in time is a value determinant. An
informational product is generally more valuable the closer the
purchaser can place himself to the moment of its expression, a
limitation in time. Many kinds of information degrade rapidly with
either time or reproduction. Relevance fades as the territory they map
changes. Noise is introduced and bandwidth lost with passage away from
the point where the information is first produced.
  
Thus, listening to a Grateful Dead tape is hardly the same experience
as attending a Grateful Dead concert. The closer one can get to the
headwaters of an informational stream, the better his changes of
finding an accurate picture of reality in it.  In an era of easy
reproduction, the informational abstractions of popular experiences
will propagate out from their source moments to reach anyone who's
interested. But it's easy enough to restrict the real experience of
the desirable event, whether knock-out punch or guitar lick, to those
willing to pay for being there. <p>

<H4>The Protection of Execution</H4>


In the hick town I come from, they don't give you much credit for just
having ideas. You are judged by what you can make of them. As things
continue to speed up, I think we see that execution is the best
protection for those designs that become physical products.  Or, as
Steve Jobs once put it, "Real artists ship." The big winner is usually
the one who gets to the market first (and with enough organizational
force to keep the lead). <p>

But, as we become fixated upon information commerce, many of us seem
to think that originality alone is sufficient to convey value,
deserving, with the right legal assurances, of a steady wage. In fact,
the best way to protect intellectual property is to act on it. It's
not enough to invent and patent, one has to innovate as well. Someone
claims to have patented the microprocessor before Intel. Maybe so. If
he'd actually started shipping microprocessors before Intel, his claim
would seem far less spurious. <p>

<H4>Information as Its Own Reward</H4>


It is now a commonplace to say that money is information. With the
exception of Krugerands, crumpled cab-fare, and the contents of those
suit-cases which drug lords are reputed to carry, most of the money in
the informatized world is in ones and zeros.  The global money supply
sloshes around the Net, as fluid as weather. It is also obvious, as I
have discussed, that information has become as fundamental to the
creation of modern wealth as land and sunlight once were. <p>

What is less obvious is the extent to which information is acquiring
intrinsic value, not as a means to acquisition but as the object to be
acquired. I suppose this has always been less explicitly the case. In
politics and academia, potency and information have always been
closely related. <p>

However, as we increasingly buy information with money, we begin to
see that buying information with other information is simple economic
exchange without the necessity of converting the product into and out
of currency. This is somewhat challenging for those who like clean
accounting, since, information theory aside, informational exchange
rates are too squishy to quantify to the decimal point. <p>

Nevertheless, most of what a middle class American purchases has
little to do with survival. We buy beauty, prestige, experience,
education, and all the obscure pleasures of owning. Many of these
things can not only be expressed in non-material terms, they can be
acquired by non-material means. <p>

And then there are the inexplicable pleasures of information itself,
the joys of learning, knowing, and teaching. The strange good feeling
of information coming into and out of oneself. Playing with ideas is a
recreation which people must be willing to pay a lot for, given the
market for books and elective seminars. We'd likely spend even more
money for such pleasures if there weren't so many opportunities to pay
for ideas with other ideas. <p>

This explains much of the collective "volunteer" work that fills the
archives, newsgroups, and databases of the Internet. Its denizens are
not working for nothing, as is widely believed. Rather they are
getting paid in something besides money. It is an economy that
consists almost entirely of information. <p>

This may become the dominant form of human trade, and if we persist in
modeling economics on a strictly monetary basis, we may be gravely
misled. <p>

<H2>GETTING PAID IN CYBERSPACE</H2>

How all the foregoing relates to solutions to the crisis in
intellectual property is something I've barely started to wrap my mind
around. It's fairly paradigm-warping to look at information through
fresh eyes--to see how very little it is like pig iron or pork
bellies, to imagine the tottering travesties of case law we will stack
up if we go on treating it legally as though it were. <p>

As I've said, I believe these towers of outmoded boilerplate will
be a smoking heap sometime in the next decade and we mind miners will
have no choice but to cast our lot with new systems that work. <p>

I'm not really so gloomy about our prospects as readers of this
jeremiad so far might conclude.  Solutions will emerge. Nature abhors
a vacuum and so does commerce. <p>

Indeed, one of the aspects of the electronic frontier that I have
always found most appealing--and the reason Mitch Kapor and I used
that phrase in naming our foundation--is the degree to which it
resembles the 19th Century American West in its natural preference for
social devices which emerge from it conditions rather than those which
are imposed from the outside. <p>

Until the West was fully settled and "civilized" in this century,
order was established according to an unwritten Code of the West that
had the fluidity of etiquette rather than the rigidity of law. Ethics
were more important than rules. Understandings were preferred over
laws, which were, in any event, largely unenforceable. <p>

I believe that law, as we understand it, was developed to protect the
interests that arose in the two economic "waves" which Alvin Toffler
accurately identified in The Third Wave.  The First Wave was
agriculturally based and required law to order ownership of the
principal source of production, land. In the Second Wave,
manufacturing became the economic mainspring, and the structure of
modern law grew around the centralized institutions that needed
protection for their reserves of capital, manpower, and hardware. <p>

Both of these economic systems required stability. Their laws were
designed to resist change and to assure some equability of
distribution within a fairly static social framework. The possibility
spaces had to be constrained to preserve the predictability necessary
to either land stewardship or capital formation. <p>

In the Third Wave we have now entered, information to a large extent
replaces land, capital, and hardware, and as I have detailed in the
preceding section, information is most at home in a much more fluid
and adaptable environment. The Third Wave is likely to bring a
fundamental shift in the purposes and methods of law that will affect
far more than simply those statutes that govern intellectual property. <p>

The "terrain" itself--the architecture of the Net--may come to serve
many of the purposes that could only be maintained in the past by
legal imposition. For example, it may be unnecessary to
constitutionally assure freedom of expression in an environment that,
in the words of my fellow EFF co-founder John Gilmore, "treats
censorship as a malfunction" and re-routes proscribed ideas around it. <p>

Similar natural balancing mechanisms may arise to smooth over the
social discontinuities that previously required legal intercession to
set right. On the Net, these differences are more likely to be spanned
by a continuous spectrum that connects as much as it separates. <p>

And, despite their fierce grip on the old legal structure, companies
which trade in information are likely to find that in their increasing
inability to deal sensibly with technological issues, the courts will
not produce results that are predictable enough to be supportive of
long-term enterprise. Every litigation becomes like a game of Russian
roulette, depending on the depth the presiding judge's
clue-impairment. <p>

Uncodified or adaptive "law," while as "fast, loose, and out of
control" as other emergent forms, is probably more likely to yield
something like justice at this point. In fact, one can already see in
development new practices to suit the conditions of virtual commerce.
The life forms of information are evolving methods to protect their
continued reproduction. <p>

For example, while all the tiny print on a commercial diskette
envelope punctiliously requires much of that who would open it, there
are, as I say, few who read those provisos, let alone follow them to
the letter. And yet, the software business remains a very healthy
sector of the American economy. <p>

Why is this? Because people seem to eventually buy the software they
really use. Once a program becomes central to your work, you want the
latest version of it, the best support, the actual manuals, all
privileges that are attached to ownership. Such practical
considerations will, in the absence of working law, become more and
more important in important in getting paid for what might easily be
obtained for nothing. <p>

I do think that some software is being purchased in the service of
ethics or the abstract awareness that the failure to buy it will
result in its not being produced any longer, but I'm going to leave
those motivators aside. While I believe that the failure of law will
almost certainly result in a compensating re-emergence of ethics as
the ordering template of society, this is a belief I don't have room
to support here. <p>

Instead, I think that, as in the case cited above, compensation for
soft products will be driven primarily by practical considerations,
all of them consistent with the true properties of digital
information, where the value lies in it, and how it can be both
manipulated and protected by technology. <p>

While the conundrum remains a conundrum, I can begin to see the
directions from which solutions may emerge, based in part on
broadening those practical solutions that are already in practice. <p>

<H2>Relationship and Its Tools</H2>


I believe one idea is central to understanding liquid commerce:
Information economics, in the absence of objects, will be based more
on relationship than possession. <p>

One existing model for the future conveyance of intellectual property
is real time performance, a medium currently used only in theater,
music, lectures, stand-up comedy and pedagogy.  I believe the concept
of performance will expand to include most of the information economy
from multi-casted soap operas to stock analysis. In these instances,
commercial exchange will be more like ticket sales to a continuous
show than the purchase of discrete bundles of that which is being
shown. <p>

The other model, of course, is service. The entire professional
class--doctors, lawyers, consultants, architects, etc.--are already
being paid directly for their intellectual property. Who needs
copyright when you're on a retainer? <p>

In fact, this model was applied to much of what is now copyrighted
until the late 18th Century. Before the industrialization of creation,
writers, composers, artists, and the like produced their products in
the private service of patrons. Without objects to distribute in a
mass market, creative people will return to a condition somewhat like
this, except that they will serve many patrons, rather than one. <p>

We can already see the emergence of companies that base their
existence on supporting and enhancing the soft property they create
rather than selling it by the shrink-wrapped piece or embedding it in
widgets. <p>

Trip Hawkins' new company for creating and licensing multimedia tools,
3DO, is an example of what I'm talking about. 3DO doesn't intend to
produce any commercial software or consumer devices. Instead, they
will act as a kind of private standards setting body, mediating among
software and device creators who will be their licensees.  They will
provide a point of commonalty for relationships between a broad
spectrum of entities. <p>

In any case, whether you think of yourself as a service provider or a
performer, the future protection of your intellectual property will
depend on your ability to control your relationship to the market--a
relationship that will most likely live and grow over time. <p>

The value of that relationship will reside in the quality of
performance, the uniqueness of your point of view, the validity of
your expertise, its relevance to your market, and, underlying
everything, the ability of that market to access your creative
services swiftly, conveniently, and interactively. <p>

<H2>Interaction and Protection</H2>


Direct interaction will provide a lot of intellectual property
protection in the future, and, indeed, it already has. No one knows
how many software pirates have bought legitimate copies of a program
after calling its publisher for technical support and being asked for
some proof of purchase, but I would guess the number is very high. <p>

The same kind of controls will be applicable to "question and answer"
relationships between authorities (or artists) and those who seek
their expertise. Newsletters, magazines, and books will be
supplemented by the ability of their subscribers to ask direct
questions of authors. <p>

Interactivity will be a billable commodity even without authorship. As
people move into the Net and increasingly get their information
directly from its point of production, unfiltered by centralized
media, they will attempt to develop the same interactive ability to
probe reality which only experience has provided them in the past.
Live access to these distant "eyes and ears" will be much easier to
cordon than access to static bundles of stored but easily reproducible
information. <p>

In most cases, control will be based on restricting access to the
freshest, highest bandwidth information. It will be a matter of
defining the ticket, the venue, the performer, and the identity of the
ticket holder, definitions that I believe will take their forms from
technology, not law. <p>

In most cases, the defining technology will be cryptography. <p>

<H2>Crypto Bottling</H2>


Cryptography, as I've said perhaps too many times, is the "material"
from which the walls, boundaries--and bottles--of Cyberspace will be
fashioned. <p>

Of course there are problems with cryptography or any other purely
technical method of property protection. It has always appeared to me
that the more security you hide your goods behind, the more likely you
are to turn your sanctuary into a target. Having come from a place
where people leave their keys in their cars and don't even have keys
to their houses, I remain convinced that the best obstacle to crime is
a society with its ethics intact. <p>

While I admit that this is not the kind of society most of us live in,
I also believe that a social over-reliance on protection by barricades
rather than conscience will eventually wither the latter by turning
intrusion and theft into a sport, rather than a crime. This is already
occurring in the digital domain as is evident in the activities of
computer crackers. <p>

Furthermore, I would argue that initial efforts to protect digital
copyright by copy protection contributed to the current condition in
which most otherwise ethical computer users seem morally untroubled by
their possession of pirated software. <p>

Instead of cultivating among the newly computerized a sense of respect
for the work of their fellows, early reliance on copy protection led
to the subliminal notion that cracking into a software package somehow
"earned" one the right to use it. Limited not by conscience but by
technical skill, many soon felt free to do whatever they could get
away with. This will continue to be a potential liability of the
encryption of digitized commerce. <p>

Furthermore, it's cautionary to remember that copy protection was
rejected by the market in most areas. Many of the upcoming efforts to
use cryptography-based protection schemes will probably suffer the
same fate. People are not going to tolerate much which makes computers
harder to use than they already are without any benefit to the user. <p>

Nevertheless, encryption has already demonstrated a certain blunt
utility. New subscriptions to various commercial satellite TV services
sky-rocketed recently after their deployment of more robust encryption
of their feeds. This, despite a booming backwoods trade in black
decoder chips conducted by folks who'd look more at home running
moonshine than cracking code. <p>

Another obvious problem with encryption as a global solution is that
once something has been unscrambled by a legitimate licensee, it may
be openly available to massive reproduction. <p>

In some instances, reproduction following decryption may not be a
problem. Many soft products degrade sharply in value with time. It may
be that the only real interest in some such products will be among
those who have purchased the keys to immediacy. <p>

Furthermore, as software becomes more modular and distribution moves
online, it will begin to metamorphose in direct interaction with its
user base. Discontinuous upgrades will smooth into a constant process
of incremental improvement and adaptation, some of it man-made and
some of it arising through genetic algorithms. Pirated copies of
software may become too static to have much value to anyone. <p>

Even in cases such as images, where the information is expected to
remain fixed, the unencrypted file could still be interwoven with code
which could continue to protect it by a wide variety of means. <p>

In most of the schemes I can project, the file would be "alive" with
permanently embedded software that could "sense" the surrounding
conditions and interact with them, For example, it might contain code
that could detect the process of duplication and cause it to
self-destruct. <p>

Other methods might give the file the ability to "phone home" through
the Net to its original owner. The continued integrity of some files
might require periodic "feeding" with digital cash from their host,
which they would then relay back to their authors. <p>

Of course files that possess the independent ability to communicate
upstream sound uncomfortably like the Morris Internet Worm. "Live"
files do have a certain viral quality.  And serious privacy issues
would arise if everyone's computer were packed with digital spies. <p>

The point is that cryptography will enable a lot of protection
technologies that will develop rapidly in the obsessive competition
that has always existed between lock- makers and lock-breakers. <p>

But cryptography will not be used simply for making locks. It is also
at the heart of both digital signatures and the afore-mentioned
digital cash, both of which I believe will be central to the future
protection of intellectual property. <p>

I believe that the generally acknowledged failure of the shareware
model in software had less to do with dishonesty than with the simple
inconvenience of paying for shareware. If the payment process can be
automated, as digital cash and signature will make possible, I believe
that soft product creators will reap a much higher return from the
bread they cast upon the waters of Cyberspace. <p>

Moreover, they will be spared much of the overhead that presently
adheres to the marketing, manufacture, sales, and distribution of
information products, whether those products are computer programs,
books, CD's, or motion pictures. This will reduce prices and further
increase the likelihood of non-compulsory payment. <p>

But of course there is a fundamental problem with a system that
requires, through technology, payment for every access to a particular
expression. It defeats the original Jeffersonian purpose of seeing
that ideas were available to everyone regardless of their economic
station. I am not comfortable with a model that will restrict inquiry
to the wealthy. <p>

<H2>An Economy of Verbs</H2>

The future forms and protections of intellectual property are densely
obscured from the entrance to the Virtual Age. Nevertheless, I can
make (or reiterate) a few flat statements that I earnestly believe
won't look too silly in fifty years. <p>

<UL>
<LI> In the absence of the old containers, almost everything we
think we know about intellectual property is wrong. We are going to
have to unlearn it. We are going to have to look at information as
though we'd never seen the stuff before. <p>

<LI> The protections that we will develop will rely far more on
ethics and technology than on law. <p>

<LI> Encryption will be the technical basis for most intellectual
property protection. (And should, for this and other reasons, be made
more widely available.) <p>

<LI> The economy of the future will be based on relationship rather
than possession. It will be continuous rather than sequential. <p>
</UL>

And finally, in the years to come, most human exchange will be virtual
rather than physical, consisting not of stuff but the stuff of which
dreams are made. Our future business will be conducted in a world made
more of verbs than nouns. <p>

<HR> 
Ojo Caliente, New Mexico, October 1, 1992
<BR> New York, New York, November 6, 1992
<BR> Brookline, Massachusetts, November 8, 1992
<BR> New York, New York, November 15, 1993
<BR> San Francisco, California, November 20, 1993
<BR> Pinedale, Wyoming, November 24-30, 1993
<BR> New York, New York, December 13-14, 1993
 <P>

This expression has lived and grown to this point over the time period
and in the places detailed above. Despite its print publication here,
I expect it will continue to evolve in liquid form, possibly for
years. <p>

The thoughts in it have not been "mine" alone but have assembled
themselves in a field of interaction that has existed between myself
and numerous others, to whom I am grateful. They particularly include:
Pamela Samuelson, Kevin Kelly, Mitch Kapor, Mike Godwin, Stewart
Brand, Mike Holderness, Miriam Barlow, Danny Hillis, Trip Hawkins, and
Alvin Toffler. <p>

However, I should note in honesty that when Wired sends me a check for
having temporarily "fixed" it on their pages, I alone will cash it... <P>

<HR> 
</DOC>