
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B01-137</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000631-B005-18</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/RELIGION/BROWN/brown-02.html 206.61.184.43 19970122073842 text/html 10504
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:38:34 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:37:34 GMT
Content-length: 10288
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<PRE>STATEMENT OF THE CASE

     In 1988, four residents of northwest Arkansas founded Our Church.  
They sent out letters to friends and neighbors they thought would want to 
be a part of Our Church.  The letters were unsigned. (Exhibit A 1,2).  
Rev. Tom Brown recieved these letters.  He immediately made photocopys of 
the letters - as instructed - and passed them to others who he thought 
would be interested.  The first person he took them to turned out to be 
one of the origional writers of the letters.  That person expressed 
interest, denied any knowlege of Our Church, and asked to be kept 
informed.  Rev. Brown heard rumors of someone trying to get permission 
from the local Unitarian Church to hold services there, but no more after 
that.
     In January of 1994, about the 10th, Rev. Brown awoke from a dream to 
a feeling of overwelming peace and expectation of great good fortune.  It 
was an unprecedented experience.  He felt like he had been touched by the 
hand of God.  He did not remember any details of the dream, just the 
extraordinary feeling upon awakening.  He located the letters several 
day's later while organizing his file cabinet.  He realized that Our 
Church was what the dream had been about.  It was time to stand up and 
start practicing his relationship with God openly, the way God intended.
     Rev. Brown owns a forty acre parcel of Ozark mountain property known 
as South Slope Farm.  He deeded one acre of that land to Our Church on 
February 14, 1994; the day we dedicate to Love, Valentines Day. (Exhibit B 
1,2).  He contacted all his friends and asked who would like to start Our 
Church with him - including the origional founders whom he still had not 
identified.  They all said they knew the Truth of Our Church, but were 
afraid of the persecution which Rev. Brown has come to know so well.  They 
refused to join openly, but each in their own way contributed something to 
getting Our Church organized.  Then he went to strangers and finally eight 
other folks signed the papers to start Our Church Incorporated, as a 
non-profit, religous corporation in the State of Arkansas. (Exhibit C 
1,2,3,4,5).  Although it is not required in the State of Arkansas they all 
agreed to a Statement of Purpose (C-5) which can not be changed except by 
unanimous agreement of all official members.
     The Deed to the acre of land owned by Our Church at Antioch Arkansas, 
is restricted by covenants as to the use of the land. (A-2)  Our Church 
Inc. is not so encumbered.  Each of the origional incorporators sought to 
establish their own branch of Our Church at their home location; or in the 
case of the Family Church of the New Dawn, preceeded the establishment of 
Our Church.  FCND was founded in 1982 in Fayetteville, Arkansas.  Official 
membership in Our Church is established by a notorized statement submitted 
to the CEO of the Corporation, signifying intention to join Our Church 
Inc. and abide by the Statement of Purpose.  The purpose of Official 
membership is to become a public, open and living example of Our Church, 
so our Brothers and Sisters in God can take heart and begin to openly live 
their lives in keeping with their knowledge of the God of their own 
understanding and their Higher Power.
     On March 29, 1994, members of Our Church Inc. met with Washington 
County Sheriff Kenneth McKee and other law enforcement officials in 
Fayetteville, Arkansas.  They discussed the plans of Our Church at Antioch 
to plant and distribute herbs and plants given to us by God for our 
Spiritual discernment and Physical nourishment.
     On Easter Sunday, April 3, 1994, Our Church at Antioch, held it's 
first service and consecration of land. 
     On August 2, 1994, Rev. Brown was accosted by DEA agents and 
Sheriff's deputies while tending the garden at Our Church at Antioch.  
They attempted to murder him, and when that failed, they stole four 
hundred and thirty five marijuana plants and three peyote plants that were 
growing there.
     July 31, was the last regular service at Our Church at Antioch.  
Since then services for Washington County, Arkansas residents have been 
held at the Family Church of the New Dawn, 1027 Hickery St., Fayetteville, 
Arkansas.  Each member church of Our Church Inc. is financially and 
theologically independent of Our Church Inc.; founded and organized by the 
membership of that church.  This is a congregational organization similar 
to the Southern Baptist Convention.  Other branchs of Our Church are 
operating in Mt. Shasta, California; Boulder, Colorado; Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma; Bee Branch, Atkins and Little Rock, Arkansas.
     On August 11, 1994, Rev. Brown was arrested and charged with growing 
marijuana and peyote, and possession of marijuana with intent to 
distribute in violation of Federal Law.  Rev. Brown insisted on the right 
to control his own case, and to not give over representation to an 
attorney, and requested the assistance of counsel.  Two seperate attorneys 
were appointed who refused to research or help Rev. Brown to research the 
law, to prepare motions, question witness's, etc. and were discharged by 
the court.  The third attorney recieved a threatening letter from the 
judge and sought to withdraw.  The judge appointed her as standby counsel 
and ordered her to not do the defendant's bidding.
     Rev. Brown attempted to testify to the Grand Jury and spent two days 
waiting while it met, but was refused.  An indictment was returned on 
September 14, 1994.  On November 4, 1994, Rev. Brown filed a motion to 
recuse the Judge based on Arkansas State Police documents which show Judge 
Waters to have been involved in a criminal conspiracy to smuggle drugs and 
move women around the country for purposes of prostitution in the 1970's 
prior to his appointment to the bench.  Judge Waters denied the motion.
     On November 8, 1994, the government filed a motion in limine which 
sought to deprive the defendant of all his defenses.  On November 28, 
1994, a hearing was held which resulted in Judge Waters finding that Our 
Church was a sincere establishment and exercise of religion, and that Rev. 
Brown's acts of growing marijuana and peyote were acts affected by the 
Religous Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, and that the government had a 
compelling interest in prohibiting that act because Congress had passed a 
law with severe criminal penalties for violating the law.  Rev. Brown 
attempted to introduce documents and witnesses to show that the attitude 
of law enforcement had changed since the passage of the law, and that 
there had been a change in the scientific knowledge also, but Judge waters 
refused to review or entertain any such evidense or witnesses.  Rev. Brown 
properly protested.  Rev. Brown would have shown that there was no Federal 
Jurisdiction under the Commerce Clause for prosecuting Our Church of 
Antioch, Arkansas, and Rev. Tom Brown, but Judge Waters refused to allow 
any presentation of any issue except as to the question of the sincerely 
of Rev.  Brown's religous exercise.  Rev. Brown had attempted to obtain 
subpeona's for witnesses to the hearing, Judge Waters granted the 
subpoenas but then issued them for the wrong date, so the witnesses could 
not show up for the hearing.  Rev. Brown protested but Judge Waters 
refused to allow any correction to be made.  Rev. Brown attempted to 
introduce evidence and witnesses that Rev. Brown's acts were necessary to 
prevent a greater evil, a necessity defense, but Judge Waters refused to 
allow any such introduction into the record, or to allow the use of that 
defense.
     On October 25, 1994, Judge Waters wrote a letter to advising attorney 
Leslie Borgogoni in which he threatned to not reimburse her for expenses 
of the defense of Rev. Brown.  In response, she filed a motion for 
clarification of duties.  At the hearing on that motion, Rev. Brown 
protested the fact that it was not conducted ex parte.  His motion was 
overruled.  Borgogoni attempted to withdraw as advising counsel but Waters 
made her standby counsel instead.  He wrote a set of rules for her which 
specifically directed her to not perform any task at the direction of Rev. 
Brown until and unless he gave up his pro per status.
     On November 19, 1994, a criminal trial was held.  Rev. Brown was 
repeatedly stopped from presenting evidense and testimony in his defense.  
Judge Waters repeatedly interupted Rev. Brown and made disparaging remarks 
about him and his attempt to defend himself.  Although Waters had admitted 
that Rev. Brown was engaged in a sincere exercise of his religion, Rev. 
Brown was denied the right to present evidence of his religion, the 
Constitution, Natural Law, Common Law, and government documents related to 
the issues of compelling interest and least restrictive means.  On 
November 30, 1994, Rev. Brown was convicted and incarcerated without bail 
in the County Jail.
     Rev. Brown immediately attempted to get access to a law library in 
order to prepare motions for new trial, etc., but was denied that access 
until January 28, 1995.  By this time the time limit on motions had 
passed, and Waters overruled all motions on that basis.
     Rev. Brown has been denied a fair trial, due process in keeping with 
the published precedent of the Eighth Circuit, and the protection of the 
Constitution and the Religous Freedom Restoration Act of 1993.  The 
prosecution of Rev. Brown for growing plants given to us by God, and 
giving away the leaves and flowers of those plants for free, no cost, no 
exchange, no renumeration whatsoever; exceeds Congressional powers granted 
by the Commerce Clause of the Federal Constitution.  In addition, Rev. 
Brown was unconstitutionally denied the assistance of counsel.  For all 
these reasons the conviction of Rev. Brown must be set aside and 
appropriate relief granted.
     In closing, Rev. Brown notes that he has been forced to prepare this 
brief without the assistance of counsel, and he requests that a liberal 
construction and interpretation be given to this document.
</PRE>
</HTML>
</DOC>