
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B06-131</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B018-218</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/ciec/facts8.html 205.177.10.31 19970215014215 text/html 28525
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:40:57 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Speech of the Plaintiffs and the Impact of the Act</title>
</head>
<body>
<h2>Speech of the Plaintiffs and the Impact of the Act</h2>

<font size = +1>

<p>118.  The plaintiffs (and the plaintiffs' members,
subscribers, patrons, and customers) interact with and use the
Internet, and cyberspace generally, in a wide variety of ways,
and they are burdened by the Act in an equally wide variety of
ways.  Plaintiffs include content providers on the Internet,
access providers to the Internet, and users of the content on the
Internet.  The Act burdens plaintiffs in all of these capacities.

<p>119.  Plaintiffs who are content providers (or whose
members or customers are content providers) are expressly subject
to the Act.  Under the Act, anyone who speaks on the Internet is
a content provider.  These plaintiffs do not understand what
standard for indecency should be used under the Act, how the
standard applies to the plaintiffs' speech, or how numerous other
provisions of the Act are to be understood and applied.  These
plaintiffs provide content that would likely or possibly be found
to be indecent as to a young child in some communities. 
Accordingly, they are subject to prosecution under the Act. 
These plaintiffs will either self-censor their speech or will
continue to speak under the threat of prosecution.

<p>120.  Plaintiffs who are, or whose members are, access
providers (including "Internet service providers" or "ISPs") are
expressly subject to the Act.  As access providers these
plaintiffs enable their customers and users to use plaintiffs'
facilities to link to the Internet.  Although the Act provides
defenses for access providers, access providers reasonably fear
that these defenses will not be construed and applied as broadly
as Congress intended, and they therefore fear they may be
directly subject to prosecution under the Act.  These plaintiffs
will continue to provide access under the threat of prosecution.

<p>121.  All plaintiffs (and their members and customers)
are users of the Internet.  These plaintiffs and other users have
a right to engage in ordinary human discourse free from the
threat of prosecution created by the Act.  In particular, these
plaintiffs and other users have a right to receive content that
is criminalized under the Act.

<p>122.  Plaintiffs AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION ("ALA")
and FREEDOM TO READ FOUNDATION ("FTRF") sue on behalf of
themselves, their members, who are libraries and librarians
across the country, and their members' patrons.  These libraries
recognize that the Internet offers their patrons a unique
opportunity to access information, and many libraries provide
their patrons with facilities the patrons can use to access the
Internet.  Many libraries also have their own World Wide Web
sites on the Internet.  Thus, in addition to providing patrons
with access to the Internet, where they can access information
posted by third parties, libraries post their own material on the
Internet.  Many libraries post their card catalogues, post
information about current events, sponsor chat groups, post
textual information or art on the library Web site, or post
licensed online versions of reference and other materials from
their library collections.  Patrons could, for example, access
the Web site of a library anywhere in the country to peruse its
card catalogue, review an encyclopedia reference, or check a
definition in the dictionary.  These libraries and librarians are
injured by the Act.  Because of fear of prosecution, they will be
chilled from posting materials on the Internet that might be
deemed "patently offensive" or "indecent" for minors by some
communities.  Given the global and unrestricted nature of the
Internet, the lack of precision in the definition of "indecency,"
and the past attempts by some persons to ban literature and
reference items from library collections, many of ALA's and
FTRF's members may choose not to post a substantial amount of
expressive material at all -- material that many adults might
consider useful for themselves or their own children -- rather
than risk prosecution for posting material that someone in some
other part of the nation might deem "indecent" or "patently
offensive" for minors.  As a result of the Act, the library
patrons ALA and FTRF members serve will be limited in the
constitutionally protected information that would otherwise be
available to them on the Internet.  These plaintiffs (and their
members) sue in their capacity as content providers, access
providers, and users of the Internet, and on behalf of their
patrons who are content providers and users of interactive
computer services.

<p>123.  Plaintiffs AOL, COMPUSERVE, MSN, and PRODIGY sue
on their own behalf and on behalf of their subscribers.  As
online service providers, these plaintiffs are content providers
and access providers, and their customers are content providers
and users of the Internet.  These plaintiffs create content and
make it available both to their customers and to the entire world
of Internet users.  They also allow their customers to create
content on the Internet (including the creation of personal Web
pages).  As speakers, these plaintiffs and their customers are
chilled by the Act in what they can say on the Internet and on
their own online services.  As access providers, these plaintiffs
fear they may be at risk of prosecution under the Act for what
others say.  And as users, these plaintiffs and their customers
are limited by the Act to the ability to access only content that
is suitable for a young child.

<p>124.  Plaintiff MICROSOFT CORPORATION ("Microsoft")
sues on its own behalf as a content provider, access software
provider, and user of the Internet.  Microsoft provides content
on the Internet through MSN, on its own Web sites, and through
postings, messages, and other contributions to the Internet. 
Microsoft's diverse content includes compilations of musical,
artistic, literary and encyclopedic information, news and current
events, and other content.  Some of this content might be
considered "indecent" or "patently offensive" in some community
in the nation, exposing Microsoft to the risk of prosecution
under the Act.  As an access software provider, Microsoft sells
or plans to sell software for accessing and exploring the
Internet, for establishing and maintaining Internet servers and
related services, and for creating Web sites and other Internet
content.  As users, Microsoft and its employees are chilled in
what they can say and the frankness of their discussion in
communications posted to or transmitted over the Internet, and
are exposed to a risk of prosecution under the Act.  Microsoft
believes that the defenses provided in Section 502(2) of the Act
are provided only to access providers, not to content providers
and/or users, and that as to access providers, including access
software providers, they are inadequate, incomplete, and expose
Microsoft to potential prosecution under the Act.  In addition,
the chilling effect of the Act on other content providers and
users of the Internet will damage Microsoft by reducing the
market for access software, services software, and content-
creation software.

<p>125.  Plaintiff APPLE COMPUTER, INC. ("Apple") sues on
its own behalf as a content provider, access software provider
and user of the Internet.  Apple provides content on the Internet
through eWorld, on its own Web sites, and through postings,
messages and other contributions to the Internet.  Because of the
vagueness of the Act, Apple is uncertain whether some of this
content might be considered "indecent" or "patently offensive" in
some community in the nation, exposing Apple to the risk of
prosecution under the Act.  As users, Apple and its employees are
chilled in what they can say and the frankness of their
discussion in communications posted to or transmitted over the
Internet, and are exposed to a risk of prosecution under the Act. 
In addition, the chilling effect of the Act on other content
providers and users of the Internet will damage Apple by reducing
the market for Internet software.

<p>126.  Plaintiff COMMERCIAL INTERNET EXCHANGE
ASSOCIATION ("CIX") sues on behalf of its member Internet service
providers ("ISPs") and the customers of their members.  CIX
members typically serve as passive carriers who offer access or
transmission, and related incidental capabilities, for the
Internet transmissions of others; as such they are clearly
covered by the defense of &#167; 223(e)(1).  However, because of
ambiguity in this defense, CIX members who operate news servers
that carry USENET content are uncertain whether they may be held
liable for the content of others that resides temporarily on
members' USENET news servers, and is accessed by users from such
servers.  In addition, many CIX members also assist content
providers in establishing and operating Web sites.  In this
capacity CIX members will often be at risk of prosecution under
the Act for what others say.  Due to fear of prosecution, CIX
members are chilled from assisting providers of valuable content
that may be deemed indecent.  Furthermore, CIX members have a
strong interest in the continued growth of the Internet as a
means of communication, and in their subscribers' rights to free
expression over the Internet.  The Act undermines both interests.

<p>127.  Plaintiff NETCOM ON-LINE COMMUNICATION SERVICES,
INC. ("NETCOM") sues on its own behalf and on behalf of its
subscribers.  As a provider of Internet access and services,
NETCOM is both a content provider and an access provider. 
NETCOM's individual subscribers create content on the Internet,
such as through the posting of personal web pages, and make that
content available both to their own customers and to the entire
world of Internet users.  As speakers, NETCOM and its subscribers
are chilled in what they can say on the Internet and on their own
Internet sites.  As an access provider, NETCOM cannot control
what others say, yet faces the risk of prosecution under the Act
for the speech of others made available through its systems.  As
users of the Internet, NETCOM and its subscribers are limited by
the Act to accessing and producing only content that is suitable
for a young child.

<p>128.  Plaintiff OPNET, INC. ("OpNet") sues on its own
behalf and on behalf of its subscribers.  As a provider of
Internet access and services to subscribers, OpNet faces
uncertainty as to the applicability of the Act's defenses.  OpNet
also fears that it will be construed to have liability for
content posted by third parties through its systems.

<p>129.  Plaintiff INTERACTIVE SERVICES ASSOCIATION
("ISA") sues on behalf of its members, who include the major
commercial online services, and other content providers, access
providers, and users of the Internet.  As with the online
services, ISA's members risk prosecution for engaging in, or
serving as a conduit for, constitutionally protected speech that
might be deemed indecent.  Accordingly, the Act will chill ISA
members from exercising their First Amendment rights.

<p>130.  Plaintiff ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN PUBLISHERS
("AAP") sues on behalf of its members, who are content providers
on, and users of, the Internet.  Although rooted in print
publishing, AAP's members are very actively involved in the
Internet.  AAP's members create electronic products to accompany
and supplement their printed books and journals; create custom
educational material on the Internet, publishing on and to
demand; communicate with authors and others, receiving
manuscripts, and editing, typesetting, and designing books
electronically; transmit finished product to licensed end-user
customers; communicate with bookstores and other wholesale and
retail accounts; and promote authors and titles online.  Many of
AAP's members have Web sites and provide content to the world on
the Internet.  Some of the content provided by AAP's members
might be considered "indecent" or "patently offensive" for minors
in some communities (as most of the efforts to ban books in
communities have been directed at books published by AAP's
members).

<p>131.  Plaintiff AMERICAN SOCIETY OF NEWSPAPER EDITORS
("ASNE") sues on behalf of its members, who are editors of daily
newspapers throughout the United States that, in addition to
publications in print form, are now or soon will be published in
electronic formats available to the public on the Internet or
through online service providers.  Historically, the First
Amendment guarantee of "freedom of the press" has protected
newspapers from government-imposed content restrictions which,
like those in the Act, prohibit and punish the dissemination of
materials considered "indecent" or "patently offensive" with
respect to non-adult readers.  By its terms, however, the Act can
be applied to the press in the same manner that it can be applied
to any other person.  ASNE members, who make the editorial
decisions regarding what content will be published in the daily
editions of their newspapers, are concerned that the Act will
require them to censor the online version of their print editions
according to these vague and overbroad statutory standards,
thereby restricting the content of the "electronic" edition of
the daily newspaper in ways that the First Amendment does not
tolerate with respect to the traditional hard-copy print edition. 
For this reason, ASNE believes the Act imposes an unprecedented
but very real threat of unconstitutional press censorship which
could throttle the Internet's potential to greatly enhance the
diversity, availability, timeliness, quality, and utility of
daily newspapers by creating a powerful disincentive for
publication through the use of interactive media technologies.  

<p>132.  Plaintiff NEWSPAPER ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA
("NAA") files this lawsuit on behalf of its members, a majority
of which are daily newspapers in the United States.  Approxi-
mately 175 daily newspapers in North America are currently
available on the Internet, via commercial online services or
through local bulletin board services.  As content providers,
newspapers have utilized the Internet to provide electronic
versions of their printed product.  In fact, many newspapers
provide archives of their print product online.  As access
providers, newspapers have established electronic forums for
local communities to communicate and to conduct business.  While
the content in newspapers is considered neither indecent nor
patently offensive when published on newsprint, it now may be
when published electronically.  The dual standard imposed by the
Act will force newspapers to edit out content from publications
offered on the Internet -- content that is constitutionally
protected and not subject to challenge in printed form.  In many
cases, newspaper publishers will be forced to edit content
contained in the archived electronic version of the newspaper
already placed on the Internet long before the Act went into
effect.  Thus, the Act will seriously infringe upon the rights of
NAA members to publish constitutionally protected news and
information.

<p>133.  Plaintiff ASSOCIATION OF PUBLISHERS, EDITORS AND
WRITERS ("APEW") sues on behalf of its members, who write and
publish in print and online.  Members of APEW include the San
Francisco Guardian, the largest and oldest independently owned
alternative newsweekly in the United States; the Internet Press
Guild, an unincorporated association of writers, authors and
journalists who publish their works online; the California First
Amendment Coalition, a nonprofit, public interest corporation
whose membership comprises approximately 700 individuals and
organizations, including most of California's daily newspapers,
many weekly and student newspapers, broadcasters, law firms and
others; and individual writers and editors including Jim Warren,
a columnist and advocate for open government, and owner and
editor of the listserv GovAccess; Professor David Farber of the
University of Pennsylvania; John Quarterman, a columnist and
Secretary of Matrix Information and Directory Services, Inc.; T.
Bruce Tober, a freelance writer who researches and writes about
the Internet for a variety of print and online publications;
Stephanie Stefanac, Editor of MacWorld Online, a monthly trade
publication for users of the Macintosh computer manufactured by
Apple Computer Co.; and Rogier van Bakel, a Contributing Editor
to Wired Magazine.  The members of APEW face criminal
prosecutions under the Act for the online publication of works
which some communities might find "indecent" or "patently
offensive."  The vagueness of the Act leaves APEW members
uncertain whether the publication of their works over the
Internet would be a crime.

<p>134.  Plaintiff SOCIETY OF PROFESSIONAL JOURNALISTS
sues on its own behalf and on behalf of its members.  The
Society's membership produces a tremendous volume of content made
available over the Internet:  news stories, special interest
articles, columns, and opinion pieces, among many others.  Each
year brings a dramatic increase in the importance of electronic
media as a venue for distributing the news and opinion pieces
produced by professional journalists.  The members of the Society
fear that their right and ability, traditionally protected by the
First Amendment, to engage in an unfettered marketplace of ideas
and expression will be severely compromised by the Communications
Decency Act.  In addition, the Society operates a listserve
called "SPJ-L," a forum among more than 1,000 Internet users
(both Society members and non-members) from roughly 25 countries
to discuss and debate primarily journalism-related issues. 
Though, or perhaps because, it typically addresses topics of the
utmost seriousness and importance for journalists, the language
used in messages posted on SPJ-L can be offensive, harsh, and
vulgar.  The Society does not edit these messages for content. 
By continuing to provide this forum for discussion and debate,
the Society risks prosecution under the Act.  Its members, whose
writings and other speech would be protected by the First
Amendment in the context of other media, will be chilled by the
Act from engaging in constitutionally protected speech over the
Internet.

<p>135.  Plaintiff HOTWIRED VENTURES LLC ("HotWired
Ventures") sues on its own behalf and on behalf of its
subscribers.  HotWired Ventures operates an online magazine named
Hotwired.  Some of HotWired's editorial content might be
considered "indecent" or "patently offensive" for minors in some
communities.  HotWired features articles containing facts about
and opinions on popular culture.  These articles sometimes
contain vulgar language and references to, inter alia, sexual
acts and sexual organs.  One area of HotWired's editorial focus
is cyberspace-related issues, including governmental attempts to
censor and regulate the Internet.  These articles sometimes
employ vulgar language in expressing opinions about this topic,
and may contain references to, and discussions of, examples of
material that might be deemed "patently offensive" or "indecent"
under the Act.  In addition, HotWired operates a regular section
called Piazza, an interactive discussion area where members can
communicate with each other both through asynchronous postings
called "threads" and in real time "chat rooms," sharing opinions
and engaging in outspoken discourse which can involve vulgar
language and may involve sexually explicit subject matter.  
Plaintiff WIRED VENTURES, LTD. ("Wired Ventures") sues on its own
behalf and on behalf of its subscribers.  Wired Ventures
publishes Wired Magazine, a print publication.  Like HotWired,
Wired publishes articles and short fiction that sometimes contain
vulgar language and references to sexual acts or sexual organs. 
Many articles published in Wired are also published online by
HotWired.  Thus, some articles that are perfectly legal for
minors or adults in print form are nevertheless banned from the
Internet.  The Act creates the anomalous situation that a
publication that is a leading commentator on issues and events
online may not under the Act be able to publish online articles
about the Internet that can be published in print.  HotWired
Ventures and Wired Ventures believe that the Act would severely
infringe their right to publish constitutionally protected
material and their readers' right to choose to read such
material.

<p>136.  Plaintiff AMERICAN BOOKSELLERS ASSOCIATION
("ABA") sues on behalf of its member bookstores (as content
providers and users) and their patrons (as users of the
Internet).  Although ABA's members are not "adult bookstores,"
many of ABA's members sell materials that deal frankly with the
subject of human sexuality.  Some member bookstores have their
own Web pages that discuss the content of books the stores sell. 
Most member bookstores use the Internet and electronic
communications to obtain information and excerpts of books from
publishers.  ABA members' right to learn about, acquire, and
distribute constitutionally protected materials, and their
patrons' right to purchase such constitutionally protected
materials, will be seriously infringed by the Act.

<p>137.  Plaintiff FAMILIES AGAINST INTERNET CENSORSHIP
("FAIC") is a national organization of parents dedicated to the
proposition that they, not the government, should decide what
their children should be able see or receive.  FAIC sues on
behalf of its members.  As parents, FAIC's members are deprived
of the opportunity to raise their children as they see fit.  As
users of the Internet, the Act violates FAIC's members' rights to
receive material suitable for adults.

<p>138.  Plaintiff CITIZENS INTERNET EMPOWERMENT COALITION
("CIEC") sues on behalf of its members as content providers,
access providers, and users of the Internet.  In particular, CIEC
and its members are injured because the Act deprives parents of
the ability to determine the content their children, including
older teenagers, should have access to on the Internet.

<p>139.  Notwithstanding the defenses set forth in the
Act, and the fact that Congress expressly directed courts to
construe those defenses broadly, plaintiffs reasonably fear
prosecution under 47 U.S.C. &#167; 223(d)(1)(B), as enacted by Section
502(2), for knowingly permitting their services or computers to
be used to display indecent material in a manner available to
persons under age 18, or to transmit such material to specific
persons under age 18.  Unless and until the defendants or the
Courts make clear that these defenses must be broadly construed,
there is nothing to prevent an aggressive prosecutor, in a
particularly intolerant community, from bringing a prosecution
and urging that the defenses be construed more narrowly than
plaintiffs believe Congress intended.

<p>140.  For these reasons, plaintiffs reasonably fear
that the defense in 47 U.S.C. &#167; 223(e)(1) may not protect online
service providers from criminal conviction for indecent
expression by third parties when that expression is located on
the providers' computers (such as when an individual computer
user posts a vulgar message to an online discussion).  Plaintiffs
reasonably fear that the defense may apply only to the extent an
online service acts as a mere conduit to enable its subscribers
to gain access to another network.

<p>141.  The speech at issue in this case is fully
protected by the First Amendment.  "Indecent" speech or "patently
offensive" communications, while considered by some to be
offensive or sexually suggestive, are not obscene.  Such speech
can have serious literary, artistic, political or other merit,
and thus has considerable value to adults and to society as a
whole.

<p>142.  The Internet, and cyberspace generally, carries a
significant amount of communications, images and text that might
be deemed inappropriate, "indecent" or "patently offensive" for
younger children (for example, in elementary school), but which
would not, under the same community standards, be deemed
inappropriate, "indecent" or "patently offensive" for older
minors (for example, in high school or early college).  The Act
makes no distinction between these age groups, and would
criminalize a university professor's distribution -- using the
university's interactive computer service -- of "indecent" but
classic works of literature to a 17-year-old freshman.

<p>143.  Dissemination of many of the same communications
whose dissemination via interactive computer services is made
criminal by the Act would not be unlawful if disseminated by
traditional print media (e.g., newspaper or magazine) or by using
the United States mail.  Thus, many of the very same
communications the Act makes it unlawful to make available to
minors through interactive computer services can lawfully be made
available through other media, and are, in fact, so available.

<p>144.  Any government regulation of "indecent" or
"patently offensive" speech may withstand constitutional scrutiny
only if it both serves a "compelling interest" and is "the least
restrictive means" to advance that interest, and only if the
benefit gained from the Act outweighs the loss of
constitutionally protected rights.

<p>145.  The government has no legitimate, much less
"compelling," interest in preventing adults from sending or
receiving "indecent" or "patently offensive" speech.  The
government has no legitimate, much less "compelling," interest in
preventing older children from sending or receiving speech that
would only be deemed "indecent" or "patently offensive" if
communicated to younger children.

<p>146. One legitimate interest the government does have
-- and the only interest articulated in the Act (&#167; 509, to be
codified at 47 U.S.C. &#167; 230) -- is to assist parents in
supervising their children's access to expressive materials.  The
Act does not, however, further that interest.  Indeed, the Act
interferes with that interest because parents who decide their
children, whether 7 or 17, should have access to some materials
that some community might deem "indecent" or "patently offensive"
for those children are prevented from exercising their parental
judgment by the Act's blanket prohibition on all access by all
persons under 18 to all such materials.

<p>147.  Even if the government had a legitimate interest,
more broadly, in preventing interactive computer service access
by all persons under 18 to communications that some community
might deem "indecent" or "patently offensive" to them, the Act
would not materially further that interest.  Among other things,
communications of foreign origin are freely accessible on the
Internet, and the United States government has no means to
prosecute foreign content-providers for violation of the Act, or
to deter such postings.  Furthermore, existing statutes and other
provisions in the Act already prohibit the use of computers to
disseminate obscenity, child pornography, harassing speech,
enticing or luring minors into inappropriate activities, and
other speech that is not protected even for adults.

<p>148.  Even if the Act could be viewed as substantially
furthering a compelling governmental interest in protecting
minors from "indecent" or "patently offensive" communications, it
is not the least restrictive means of achieving that interest. 
The screening and blocking tools described above achieve that
interest far more effectively than does the Act itself, and with
no adverse impact on the constitutional rights of adults. 
Efforts by government to spur the further development of such
tools would further the claimed governmental interest more
directly and materially than does the Act.

<p>149.  Even if the Act could be viewed as the least
restrictive means to further a compelling governmental interest
in protecting minors from "indecent" or "patently offensive"
communications, any benefit gained from the Act would be far
outweighed by the loss of constitutionally protected rights of
adults, because only some applications of the Act will in fact
protect minors, but every application of the Act will punish or
deter speech that is constitutionally protected for adults.

<p>

</font>

<hr>

<p>Go back to the <a href = "complaint.html">index</a>.
<br>Go to <a href = "causes.html">next section</a>.

</body>
</html>
</DOC>