
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B04-98</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B024-144</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/digi_infra/ACTA/ACTA_petition.html 205.177.10.31 19970215002229 text/html 20583
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 00:21:11 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>

<HEAD>

<TITLE>ACTA Petition to FCC</TITLE>

</HEAD>

<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF">

<H2>"Unofficial" copy of ACTA Petition</H2>
<H3>from the Federal Communications Commission</H3>

<PRE WIDTH="80">


<CENTER>BEFORE THE 

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

Washington, D.C. 20554

</CENTER>



<strong>

In the Matter of                        

THE PROVISION OF INTERSTATE AND    

INTERNATIONAL INTEREXCHANGE        

TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE VIA THE 

"INTERNET" BY NON-TARIFFED, UNCERTIFIED 

ENTITIES                           



AMERICA'S CARRIERS TELECOMMUNICATION

ASSOCIATION ("ACTA"),              

     Petitioner                    



PETITION FOR DECLARATORY RULING,   

SPECIAL RELIEF, AND                

INSTITUTION OF RULEMAKING AGAINST: 



VocalTec, Inc.; Internet Telephone 

Company; Third Planet Publishing Inc.;

Camelot Corporation; Quarterdeck        

Corporation; and Other Providers        

of Non-tariiffed, and Uncertified       

Interexchange Telecommunications        

Services,                          

     Respondents.                  




To the Commission:     

</strong>

<hr>


<STRONG>SUMMARY OF FILING</STRONG>


     America's Carriers Telecommunication Association ("ACTA"), a

trade association of interexchange telecommunications companies,

submits this Petition for Declaratory Ruling, for Special Relief,

and for Institution of Rulemaking Proceedings.  This petition

concerns a new technology: a computer software product that

enables a computer with Internet access to be used as a long

distance telephone, carrying voice transmissions, at virtually no

charge for the call.


     ACTA submits that the providers of this software are tele-

communications carriers and, as such, should be subject to FCC

regulation like all telecommunications cations carriers.  ACTA also

submits that the FCC has the authority to regulate the Internet.


     ACTA submits that it is not in the public interest to permit

long distance service to be given away, depriving those who must

maintain the telecommunications infrastructure of the revenue to

do so, and nor is it in the public interest for these select

telecommunications carriers to operate outside the regulatory

requirements applicable to all other carriers.


     ACTA asks the Commission to issue a declaratory ruling

confirming its authority over interstate and international

telecommunications services using the Internet.


     ACTA asks the Commission, as special relief. to order the

Respondents to immediately stop their unauthorized provisioning

of telecommunications services pending their compliance with 47

U.S.C. Sections 203 and 214. and in order to give the Commission time

for appropriate rulemaking.


     ACTA asks the Commission to institute rulemaking to govern

the use of the Internet for providing telecommunications ser-

vices.


<HR>


<STRONG>PETITION FOR DECLARATORY RULING,

SPECIAL RELIEF, AND INSTITUTION OF RULEMAKING</STRONG>


     America's Carriers Telecommunication Association ("ACTA").

by its attorneys, submits this Petition for Declaratory Ruling,

for Special Relief, and for Institution of Rulemaking Proceed-

ings.  In support of this petition, the following is shown.


<STRONG>STANDING</STRONG>   


	ACTA is a national trade association of competitive

interexchange, non-dominant telecommunications companies.  Its

members provide interexchange telecommunications services on an

intrastate, interstate and international basis to the public at

large.


     Some of its members also act as underlying (or wholesale)

carriers providing network facilities, equipment and service to

other member carriers which permits telecommunications services

to be resold to the public.  Other ACTA members supply facilities

and equipment to member and non-member wholesale and resale

carriers.


     ACTA's carrier members must be certificated and tariffed

before the FCC and most state regulatory commissions in order to

render their telecommunications service to the public.  In

addition, ACTA carrier members are subject to the requirements of

the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (the "Act"),  and

various state laws and regulations which prohibit engaging in

unreasonable practices and/or unduly discriminatory conduct.


     ACTA carrier members are required to pay, directly, or

indirectly, various fees and charges in order to render their

services to the public.  Filing fees and annual fees are levied

by the FCC and most states.


     In addition, the FCC and most states require interexchange

carriers to assess and collect from the using public specific

charges to support various regulatory policies and programs used

to sustain and advance national and state goals for telecommuni-

cations.


     Entities, like those which are described hereinafter, which

do not comply with or operate subject to the same statutory and

regulatory requirements as ACTA's carrier members, distort the

economic and public interest environment in which ACTA carrier

members and nonmembers must operate.  Continuing to allow such

entities to operate without complying with or being subject to

the same legal and regulatory requirements as ACTA carrier

members threatens the continued viability of ACTA's members and

their ability to serve the public and acquit their public inter-

est obligations under federal and state laws.


     As the appointed representative of its members charged with

advancing their economic interests and assisting in achieving and

maintaining their legal and regulatory compliance, ACTA has

standing to file and prosecute these petitions.



<STRONG>STATEMENT OF FACTS AND BACKGROUND</STRONG>


     A growing number of companies are selling software for the

specific purpose of allowing users of the Internet to make free

or next to free local, interexchange (intraLATA, interLATA) and

international telephone calls using the user's computer (Attach

ment 1).  One of the Respondents, VocalTec, Inc., advertises the

ability of its software called "Internet Phone," to connect any

user of "Internet Phone" with any other user of "Internet Phone"

anywhere in the world.  The software enables users to audibly

talk with one another in real-time.  Respondents make a one-time

charge for the software, but users incur no other charges for

making local or long distance telephone calls to any other

"Internet Phone" user in the world (except for whatever the user

already pays monthly to whomever provides them Internet access).



<STRONG>ASSERTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF JURISDICTION</STRONG>


     ACTA submits that it is incumbent upon the Commission to

exercise jurisdiction over the use of the Internet for unregu-

lated interstate and international telecommunications services. 

As a first step, ACTA submits that the Commission may deem it

appropriate to issue a declaratory ruling officially establishing

its interest in and authority over interstate and international

telecommunications services using the Internet.


     Secondly, ACTA submits that the Commission has an obliga

tion, heightened by the recent enactment of the Telecommunica-

tions Act of 1996, to address on a focused basis the on-going,

unregulated and unauthorized provisioning of telecommunications

services.  The Commission should, as special relief, issue an

order to the Respondents to immediately stop arranging for,

implementing, and marketing non-tariffed, uncertified telecommu-

nications services without complying with applicable provisions

of the Act, particularly Sections 203 and 214, codified at 47

U.S.C. Sections 203 and 214.


     Further, ACTA submits that it is incumbent upon the Commis-

sion to examine and adopt rules, policies and regulations govern

ing the uses of the Internet for the provisioning of telecommuni-

cations services.  The use of the Internet to provide telecommu-

nications services has an impact on the traditional means,

methods, systems, providers, and users of telecommunications

services.  The unfair competition created by the current unregu-

lated bypass of the traditional means by which long distance

services are sold could, if left unchecked, eventually create

serious economic hardship on all existing participants in the

long distance marketplace and the public which is served by those

participants.  Ignored, such unregulated operations will rapidly

grow and create a far more significant and difficult to control

"private" operational enclave of telecommu nications providers

and users.  Such development will clearly be detrimental to the

health of the nation's telecommunications industry and the

maintenance of the nation's telecommunications infrastructure.


<STRONG>ARGUMENT</STRONG>


     <U>Commission's Authority to Regulate the Internet</U>.  ACTA

submits that the Commission has the authority to regulate the

Internet under the provisions of 47 U.S.C.  Section 151, which created

the Commission:


<EM>[for the purpose of regulating interstate and foreign

commerce in communication by wire and radio so as to make avail

able, so far as possible, to all the people of the United States

a rapid, efficient, Nation-wide, and world-wide wire and radio

communication service with adequate facilities at reasonable

charges, for the purpose of the national defense. for the purpose

of promoting safety of life and property, through the use of wire

and radio communication. . . .</EM>


The Internet is a unique form of wire communication.  It is a

resource whose benefits are still being explored and whose value

is not fully realized.  Its capacity is not, however, infinite. 

The misuse of the Internet as a way to bypass the traditional

means of obtaining long distance service could result in a

significant reduction of the Internet's ability to handle the

customary types of Internet traffic.  The Commission has histori-

cally protected the public interest by allocating finite communi-

cations resources/frequencies and organizing communications

traffic.  ACTA submits that here also it would be in the public

interest for the Commission to define the type of permissible

communications which may be effected over the Internet.


     <U>Commission's Authority to Regulate Respondents as Interstate

Telecommunications Carriers</U>.  ACTA submits that by both estab-

lished precedents defining "common carriage" or public utility"

type of operations for purposes of regulatory jurisdiction, and

by statutory enactment, the Respondents, as purveyors of Internet

long distance services, are interstate telecommunications carri-

ers, subject to federal regulation.  Section 3 of the new

"Telecommunications Act of 1996," Pub.  L. No. 104-104, 110

Stat. 56 (1996), to be codified at 47 U.S.C. Section 153, includes the

following definitions:


<EM>


(48) Telecommunications.--The term "telecommunications"

means the transmission, between or among points specified by the

user, of informa tion of the user's choosing, without change in

the form or content of the information as sent and received.


(49) Telecommunications Carrier.--The term "telecommunica-

tions carrier" means any provider of telecommunications services,

except that such term does not include aggregators of telecommu-

nications services (as defined in section 226).  A telecommunica-

tions carrier shall be treated as a common carrier under this Act

only to the extent that it is engaged in providing telecommunica-

tions services, except that the Commission shall determine

whether the provision of fixed and mobile satellite service shall

be treated as common carriage.


(51) Telecommunications Service.--The term "telecommunica-

tions service" means the offering of telecommunications for a fee

directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be

effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the

facilities used.


</EM>


It would appear that Respondents are currently operating without

having complied with the requirements of the Communications Act

of 1934, as amended, applicable to providing interstate and

international telecommunications services. e.g., Sections 203 and

213, codified at 47 U.S.C. Sections 203 and 214.


     Case law also supports the Commission's authority to regu-

late the Respondents.  In 1968, the Supreme Court was presented

the issue of the Commission's authority to regulate the cable

television industry, or CATV, then still in its infancy but

growing quickly.  In <EM>United States v. Southwestern Cable Co</EM>., 

392 U.S. 157 (1968), the Supreme Court had to decide whether the

Federal Communications Commission 1) had the authority under the

Communications Act of 1934, as amended, to regulate CATV systems,

a new technology and therefore not specifically discussed in the

Act, and 2) if the Commission had such authority, whether it also

had the authority to issue the particular prohibitory order that

it had: one designed generally to preserve the status quo pending

further investigation and proceedings, and not issued pursuant to

the cease and desist rules of Section 312 of the Act (47 U.S.C.  

Section 312).


     The Supreme Court answered both questions in the affirma-

tive.  The Supreme Court stated that "the [Federal Communications]

Commission has reasonably concluded that regulatory authority

over CATV [was] imperative if it [was] to perform with appropri-

ate effectiveness certain of its other responsibil ities." Id. at

173.  At that time, cable television characteristically neither

produced its own programming nor paid producers or broadcasters

for use of the programming which CATV redistributed.  Id. at 162. 

The Court noted the Commission's concern that competition by CATV

might destroy or degrade the service offered by local broadcast

ers and exacerbate the financial difficulties of UHF and educa-

tional television broadcasters.


     <U>Commission's Authority to Grant Special Relief to Maintain

the Status Quo</U>.  With regard to the procedural issue, the Court

in Southwestern Cable upheld the authority of the Commission to

issue an order maintain the status quo.  The argument was made

that the Commission could only issue prohibitory orders under the

Act's Section 312 cease and desist provisions which, the Court

assumed without finding, were only proper after a hearing or the

waiver of the right to a hearing.  The Court rejected that

argument. stating:


  <EM>   The Commission's order was thus not, in form or function, a

cease-and- desist order that must issue under Sections 312(b),

(c).  The Commission has acknowledged that, in this area of rapid

and significant change, there may be situations in which its

generalized regulations are inadequate, and special or additional

forms of relief are imperative.  It has found that the present

case may prove to be such a situation, and that the public

interest demands "interim relief limiting further expansion,"

pending hearings to determine appropriate Commission action. 

Such orders do not exceed the Commission's authority.  This Court

has recognized that "the administrative process [must] possess

sufficient flexibility to adjust itself' to the "dynamic aspects

of radio transmission," F. C. C. v. Pottsville Broadcasting Co.,

supra, at 138, and that it was precisely for that reason that

Congress declined to "stereotype the powers of the Commission to

specific details......... National Broadcasting Co. v. United

States, supra, at 219.</EM>


The Commission should take the same action in 1996 with regard to

the new technology of long distance calling via Internet as it

did thirty years ago in 1966 with regard to the then-new technol-

ogy of cable television: grant special relief to maintain the

status quo so that it might carefully consider what rules are

required to best protect the public interest and to carry out Its

statutory duties.


     <U>Other Issues Necessitating the Commission's Regulation of

Long Distance via the Internet</U>.  The Commission has a duty to

oversee and effect the Telecommunications Act of 1996 as well as

its long-standing duties under 47 U.S.C.  Section 151.  The Commission

should take action in order to preserve fair competition and the

health of the Nation's telecommunications industry.  Absent a

healthy industry, with users paying telecommunications companies

a fair price for telecommunica tions services, the Commission's

duty to effectively promote universal service cannot be achieved. 

Absent action by the Commission, the new technology could be used

to circumvent restrictions traditionally found in tariffs con

cerning unlawful uses, such as gambling, obscenity, prostitution,

drug traffic, and other illegal acts.


<STRONG>INFORMATION REGARDING RESPONDENTS</STRONG>


     ACTA does not possess a listing of all the companies provid

ing free long distance calls via computer software.  However,

Attachment I contains some information regarding the following

Internet telephone software companies and products:


          a. Company:	VocalTec, Inc. 

                              157 Veterans Drive 

                              Northvale, NJ 07647

                              Telephone: (201) 768-9400

             Product:         Internet Phone

             Distributors:    VocalTec, Inc.; and 

                              Ventana Communications Group 

                              Research Triangle Park, NC


          b. Company:         Internet Telephone Company 

                              Boca Raton, FL 

                              Telephone (407) 989-8503

             Product:         WebPhone


          c. Company:         Third Planet Publishing Inc. 

                              a division of Camelot Corporation

             Product:         Digiphone


          d. Company:         Quarterdeck Corporation

                              13160 Mindanao Way, 3rd Floor 

                              Marina Del Ray, CA 90292 

                              Telephone (310) 309-3700       

             Product:         WebTalk


          e. Company:         Unknown

             Product:         CyberPhone



<STRONG>CONCLUSION

</STRONG>


     Permitting long distance service to be given away is not in

the public interest.  Therefore, ACTA urges the Federal Communi-

cations Commission ("the Commission") to exercise its jurisdic-

tion in this matter and: issue a declaratory ruling establishing

its authority over interstate and international telecommuni-

cations services using the Internet; grant special relief to

maintain the status quo by immediately stop the sale of this

software; and institute rulemaking proceedings defining permissi-

ble communications over the Internet.


                         Respectfully submitted,



                         AMERICA'S CARRIERS

                         TELECOMMUNICATIONS ASSOCIATION


                         Charles H. Helein

                         General Counsel


     Of Counsel:

     Helein & Associates, P.C.

     8180 Greensboro Drive

     Suite 700

     McLean, Virginia 22102

     (703)     714-1300 (Telephone)

     (703)     714-1330 (Facsimile)



     Dated: March 4, 1995


<hr>


Footnotes:


     1   47 U.S.C.   201 et seq.


     2   The user must hook up a microphone to his computer and

either a headset or speakers.


     3   ACTA asserts that Respondents are also intrastate

telecommunications carriers, subject to regulation by state

public utility commissions.


     4   The Commission had ordered that respondents, a cable

company, generally restrict their carriage of Los Angeles signals

to areas served by them on February 14, 1966, pending hearings to

determine whether the carriage of such signals into San Diego

contravened the public interest.  The order did not prohibit the

addition of new subscribers within areas served by respon dents

on February 15, 1966; it did not prevent service to other sub

scribers who began receiving service or who submitted an ac-

cepted subscription request" between February 15, 1966, and the

date of the Commission's order; and it did not preclude the

carriage of San Diego and Tijuana, Mexico, signals to subscribers

in new areas of service.  <EM>United States v. Southwestern

Cable Co</EM>., 392 U.S. 157, 180 (1968).


     5   Id. a
</DOC>