
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B11-279</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000618-B041-375</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.007.html 130.91.195.242 19970122052236 text/html 18007
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:22:36 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 17835
Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:30:50 GMT
</DOCHDR>
The Clipper Initiative part 3 of 3 <p>

In the absence of any other actions by the Government, if non-key
escrow telephone encryption devices (such as the new AT&amp;T
devices) become widely available, then the sophisticated criminal
will use these devices to protect his or her communications from
wiretaps.  That is the stated reason3 that NSA reacted so
strongly against the original AT&amp;T DES phone security device.
Other criminal elements (the average ones) will probably keep
using the phone system without protection.  Thus the Government
will again retain the ability to tap the phones of ordinary
citizens and average criminals but lose the ability to tap the
phones of sophisticated criminals. <p>

If the Government equips every phone with key escrow: <p>

Suppose the Government decided that the wiretap issue is of such
importance that it would pay to have every phone in the country
equipped with a key escrow capability so that all phone calls
would be subject to easy decryption in the case of a wiretap.
Most citizens and average criminals would no doubt continue to
use the new key escrow phone system in the same way they use
phones today, thus remaining subject to wiretaps.  However,
sophisticated criminals, realizing what is happening, would
likely resort to other means (such as super encryption or use of
the new AT&amp;T devices) to protect their communications on top of
the key escrow devices, thus exempting themselves from wiretaps.
In this scenario, the Government will retain the ability to tap
ordinary citizens and our average criminals but still lose access
to the communications of the sophisticated criminal (if this
looks repetitive, it is). <p>

Or, if the Government outlaws all non-key escrow encryption: <p>

Another scenario is the often mentioned case in which the
Government outlaws all forms of encryption except those that use
key escrow.  (Please ignore the civil liberty issues that would
arise from such an action for this discussion.)  Once again most
citizens, including average criminals, would continue to use the
phone system (mostly in the clear with only limited key escrow
capability installed), the same as they do now.  These people
would continue to be subject to the same level of wiretap as
today.  But the sophisticated criminal who is undeterred by using
illegal technology will have no qualms about supplementing his or
her telephone security and thus will be able again to escape law
enforcement's wiretap capability. Once again, the result is the
same as for the preceding scenarios. <p>

Or, ... others? <p>

The reader is encouraged to examine other scenarios.  But I
postulate that all will result in the same conclusion we saw
repeatedly in the above cases: in the future, for those elements
who wish to protect their communications against interception by
the Government or anyone else, there is nothing the Government
will be able to do to stop them.  Key escrow procedures will not
alter this situation. <p>

Technology evolves, whether we like it or not <p>

The Government, like other elements of society, is subject to
shifts in technology, which in some cases bring forth new and
wonderful capabilities but at times also eliminate capabilities
previously enjoyed. <p>

     The laser reader at the grocery checkout allowed
              grocery chains to run much more efficiently but also
              took away individual pricing, which many people dearly
              miss. <p>

     The bomber was a terrifying threat until radar allowed
              improvements to defensive measures.  Stealth technology
              has now shifted that balance again to the offensive. <p>

But we don't hear cries to ban stealth technology or to insist
that the other guy put a little reflector on his Stealth planes
so our radar can detect them.  We accept the shift in technology
for what it is and do as best we can. <p>

The balance of technology has long favored the ability to wire
tap communications.  With widespread use of private branch
exchanges and cryptography, that balance will shift no matter
what else we might do to attempt to slow it.  We must be careful
in our haste to  impede this technological shift lest we
introduce expensive and invasive capabilities that do not achieve
what we desire. <p>

Footnotes for APPENIX A <p>

1      Jim Kallstrom, FBI, in answer to a question before the
       CSSPAB on July 29, 1993. <p>

2      Jim Kallstrom, FBI, in answer to a question at a Clipper
       Briefing April 24, 1993, at the New Executive Office
       Building, Washington, DC. <p>

3      Testimony by Dr. Clinton Brooks on June 2, 1993, before the
       CSSPAB. <p>

APPENDIX B <p>

How will key escrow work? <p>

The original Clipper announcement indicated that the Initiative
was to be used for telephone-like communications, at least for
now.  Many in the computer industry have been concerned about the
impact of a hardware-only key escrow solution on their ability to
supply products employing cryptography.  An examination of the
information supplied to date on key escrow provides a basic
understanding of how key escrow will work domestically in
telephone systems but little insight into its use in computer
systems, or internationally. <p>

On July 30, 1993, NIST unveiled a draft "Escrowed Encryption
Standard" that describes, often in purposefully vague terms, how
a key escrow system will work.  It includes a statement of
applicability for voice, fax, and data limited communication
levels of up to 14.2 Kbps and below.  (For those not into
communications jargon, that amounts to voice-grade, point-to-
point communication links such as when one picks up the phone to
dial another person or send a fax.)  The application of key
escrow to high bandwidth computer communications networks is
apparently being left for later documents. <p>

The Government has insisted that the encryption being used for
key escrow must be kept secret and only made available in
hardware versions that are highly tamper resistant so that the
key escrow measures cannot be subverted or bypassed. <p>

First for telephones ... <p>

The operation of telephone security devices (such as the AT&amp;T
3600 "bump-in-the-wire"), in the absence of key escrow, can
readily be understood.  In such devices, the user (typically a
person rather than a computer) places a phone call and, once a
connection has been established with the desired parties, presses
the "secure" button which initiates the synchronization of both
parties' encryption devices.  At this point encrypted
communication proceeds until either party hangs up or presses the
"clear" button.  This is approximately how the original AT&amp;T 3600
that uses the DES operates. <p>

The addition of key escrow to such a device occurs approximately
as follows.  After the "secure" key is pressed and the
cryptographic synchronization has taken place, each device
generates a special "Law Enforcement Access Field" (LEAF) and
exchanges it with the device at the other end of the connection.
The LEAF contains, among other things, an encrypted version of
the device's unique identification number. <p>

If a wiretap is in place when the "secure" key is pressed, the
wiretap authorities will be able to detect the LEAF and extract
the unique id, which can then be sent to the Government key
escrow agents (two of them are envisioned at present for added
protection from improper   use).  Each key escrow agent will
return his/her instance of the device's unique key in encrypted
forms that together will allow the wiretap authority to decrypt
the scrambled communications. <p>

The equipment that the wiretap authority will need to detect key
escrowed telephone communications and ascertain the target
device's unique id will be relatively straight forward. Once it
detects the synchronization exchange between encryption devices,
it need only wait until the LEAF is sent to pick up the device's
ID. <p>

How will the exchange with the key escrow agents take place? <p>

How the actual exchange between the law enforcement authority and
the two key escrow agents will occur has not been publicly stated
(at least as of this writing1).  The escrow agent must determine
that the law enforcement authority has a valid wiretap court
order even though he or she must not be told whom the wiretap is
for or to whom the device ID belongs. The exchange between the
wiretapper and the two key escrow agents must happen quickly
because real-time taps of urgent phone calls may be taking place. <p>

Under these circumstances, it is difficult to comprehend what
particularly critical role the escrow agent is performing since
he or she has virtually no information on which to base a
decision to send the device's unique key to the wiretapper.  It
is also difficult to see how the audit trail that each escrow
agent must keep will be of any value in detecting misuse of the
system since all it contains is the fact that a requested key was
returned to a particular wiretap authority at a particular time. <p>

How many intercept devices there will be has not yet been
determined.  One per law enforcement jurisdiction seems too many,
one per locality having wiretaps last year doesn't seem right,
and a few stockpiled in Washington with the key escrow agents
feels wrong. <p>

And who will pay for all of this? <p>

How much the key escrow service will cost and who will pay for it
have not yet been determined either.  Presumably, the Government
will pay for the costs of acquiring, storing, cataloging, and
accessing escrow keys, though it may seek an increase in the
Federal excise tax on phone use to fund it.  The user will have
to pay for the device (unless the scenario in which the
Government pays for everything comes about).  The price of the
AT&amp;T devices today is approximately $1200 each.  Presumably, the
Clipper version of the AT&amp;T device will not cost the consumer any
more (even though because of the extra Clipper chip it will cost
AT&amp;T more to make).  But unless the Clipper version is actually
lower in price than the non-key escrow devices, it is difficult
to see why a consumer will choose the key escrow   version over
the ordinary one.  It also remains to be seen how many people are
willing to pay extra (even if the price drops by a factor of ten)
for any form of telephone security. <p>

... and then for computer communications? <p>

Typically, computer-to-computer communications such as electronic
mail do not involve a time synchronization between the sender and
the receiver.  One can originate mail that takes minutes or hours
to deliver, and the receiver can take days to get around to
reading it.  So the equivalent of one user pressing the "secure"
button to synchronize the encryption devices with the receiver
does not exist. <p>

Today's electronic mail security services typically use a pseudo
random number to encrypt the text of the message to be sent and
then encrypt that message key using the receiver's public key to
protect it during transmission and send it along with the
encrypted message.  The receiver's process looks up his or her
private key, decrypts the message key, and then decrypts the
message itself.  It would be possible to have the originating
process generate a LEAF and send it along with the message so
that any wiretap could identify the unique ID of the sender.
This would, of course, require a LEAF for every message sent. <p>

Is hardware-only encryption feasible? <p>

The Government has stated a firm requirement that the encryption
process must be performed in hardware to protect the integrity of
the encryption itself and the resulting LEAF.  Clearly that
portion of the system that does the encryption can be implemented
in a hardware device or smart card or PCMCIA card.  The
electronic mail (or other) application system itself will at some
level be implemented in software on a host computer, personal
computer, or workstation.  That software, while it probably
cannot compromise the hardware, can certainly bypass it, leaving
out or modifying the LEAF.  Such action could result in
unsuccessful decryption by the receiver's hardware device. <p>

But there are several scenarios in which groups of people who
want to defeat the key escrow process will certainly be able to
do so.  The first case involves using another software encryption
process (such as Pretty Good Privacy [PGP] or Privacy Enhanced
Mail [PEM]) to superencrypt the message before sending it to the
key escrow encryption hardware.  The message would have a
legitimate LEAF and be fully compliant with the latest version of
the Escrowed Encryption Standard.  But if the law enforcement
authorities ever try to decrypt it, they will find the
superencrypted message underneath. <p>

A second approach at defeating the escrow process would be for
the software that processes the message after it has been
encrypted by the key escrow hardware to save the LEAF and modify
the one that is contained in the message so that it looks okay.
The real LEAF could be forwarded in parts in other portions of
the communications protocols so that the receiving  system could
reconstruct the proper LEAF, reinsert it in the message, and send
the message to the key escrow decryption hardware.  Any law
enforcement use would, of course, be thwarted by the improper
LEAF. <p>

A third approach would be to just encrypt the message after it
has been through the key escrow hardware so that the message,
LEAF and all, would be encrypted.  Of course, if one is going to
do this, one would not bother with the key escrow hardware in the
first place. <p>

The point of all this is that truly hardware-only implementations
of key escrow techniques are not possible in computer
applications.  Within a very short time after the introduction of
key escrow systems, software patches for most popular application
programs to defeat key escrow without detection (until a wiretap
is attempted) will be available on free software bulletin boards
everywhere.  Anyone who wants to protect their communications
from wiretap can do so easily without detection.  Even if the
Government were to mandate the use of key escrow hardware, one
can quickly expect software implementations that look like the
hardware output (but won't work on a wiretap) to crop up just to
save the extra cost of purchasing the hardware. <p>

Interception complexity <p>

The problems for the interceptor are considerably more difficult
than in the telephone case. First of all, the wiretap must
capture all of the data being sent to be effective.  This will be
okay if the direct link to the user's computer is tapped, but
much more difficult if only one of the many links in the wide
area network over which the user's data is sent can be tapped,
since only portions of the communications may be intercepted. <p>

The interceptor's device must understand all of the computer
protocols up to and including the specific electronic mail or
other application protocol to be able to find the LEAF in the
maze of protocol layers.  Given today's sophisticated protocol
handling devices, building such an interception tool is not
considered a technological challenge, but a general purpose tool
capable of intercepting LEAFs in a wide variety of application
layer protocol streams will be considerably more complex than the
simple telephone interception device. <p>

Legal side of broad network wiretaps? <p>

It is also worthy of some legal scholar's review to determine if
the provisions in the wiretap statute that require minimization
of the intercept of traffic other than that associated with the
actual wiretap target will render blanket searches of wide area
network links illegal.  It certainly will be hard to avoid
examining massive quantities of information that have absolutely
nothing to do with the wiretap target in such a search. <p>

All of these concerns taken together make it clear that
implementing key escrow encryption in the large number of
existing and future applications for computer communications will
be a much more difficult task than that envisioned for telephone
systems. <p>

And who will pay? <p>

Once again, presumably the Government will pay for the
interception costs, but the user will have to pay for the actual
hardware devices that are employed.  The cost of $25 per chip
translates into $100 per device, once it is packaged and
documented for end user installation. If one envisions 10 million
such devices put into operation in the next few years, that
amounts to $1 billion in extra cost to the user community.  This
cost must be weighed against the essentially free software
packages that are available.  And for what capability? <p>

But does the FBI really need to obtain computer traffic by
wiretap? <p>

In all the comments I have seen to date, no one has indicated
that the law enforcement community needs wiretaps to obtain
computer communications.  Most computer systems have automatic
backup capabilities that keep archive copies of all files in case
of equipment failures.  Law enforcement authorities can obtain
copies of electronic mail or other computer files through
traditional search warrant procedures instead of resorting to
difficult-to-obtain wiretaps.  A counter argument might be that
searches yield historical data while wiretaps yield real-time
data.  But until there is a demonstrated need for a capability,
we must not use the possibility that we might want something as
the excuse to pursue a path that is contrary to technological
evolution. <p>

Footnote for APPENDIX B <p>

1      The information in this section of the paper is derived from
       the testimony of Mr. Geoffrey Greiveldinger, Special
       Counsel, Narcotic and Dangerous Drug Section of the
       Department of Justice before the CSSPAB on July 29, 1993. <p>

</DOC>