
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B12-123</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000631-B024-174</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.153.html 130.91.195.242 19970122070056 text/html 102018
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 07:00:45 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 101845
Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:33:16 GMT
</DOCHDR>
Good articles on technology <p>

A couple of good articles ...
(Also, you're going to cover digital telephony, arent you?)
Also, read the Walker article in 3 parts (Farber's readings), it has
stuff on technology which you could cover. 
<hr>
PAGE 62
                 145TH STORY of Level 1 printed in FULL format.
                                                                               
                   Copyright 1992 Information Access Company;
                   Copyright Seybold Publications Inc. 1992
                                 Digital Media <p>

April 20, 1992 <p>

SECTION: Vol. 1 ; No. 11 ; Pg. 7; ISSN: 1056-7038 <p>

LENGTH: 3413 words <p>

HEADLINE: F.B.I. to 'dumb down' telecom equipment: proposed legislation has
unsettling implications for future of digital media; fears of inability to tap
computer conversationsincludes related articles on digital communications,
regulation proposal <p>

BYLINE: Caruso, Denise <p>

BODY:
    Proposed legislation has <p>

unsetting implications for <p>

future of digital media <p>

It is an unfortunate trait of humankind that we often do not note our
watershed events until history has recorded their aftermath. <p>

The transition to digital technology that we are facing today is one of
those watersheds. Almost every vendor in every area of computing, consumer
electronics, data communication and telecommunication is looking at new ways to
transmit digital information, either over wires or through the airwaves. What
we are witnessing., whether we know it yet or not, is the building of a vast
global network, with new foundations and new paradigms for communication and
commerce. <p>

Safe and reasonable commerce <p>

Large pan-industry investments (like the ones mentioned in "A Tremendous
Blossoming," p. 9) are being made based on the assumption that such commerce
can and will be conducted in a safe and reasonable manner over networks. <p>

But that assumption is in question today. People who attended the second
annual Computers, Freedom and Privacy (CFP-2) conference in Washington DC late
last month were shocked to read copies of a legislative proposal instigated by
the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation called "Digital Telephony." The
proposed bill, which could be tacked on as an amendment to an existing bill, is
presently being sponsored by Ernest Hollings, the Democratic senator from South
Carolina and chairman of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and
Transportation. <p>

Should government dictate product design? The proposal apparently sprang
forth from the FBI's concern that it cannot keep up with digital communications
technology, especially in the area of wiretap. The agency believes_that as
signals sent over telephone lines become digital, it will be incapable of
finding and recording the conversations that it is legally entitled to
intercept.  PAGE 63
                         Digital Media, April 20, 1992 <p>

To avoid this scenario, the F.B.I. is processing that the U.S. Federal
Communications Commissions and the U.S. Attorney General's office be given the
power to "determine" the technological interception needs of the government"
and issue regulations about how vendors must comply - specifically to allow the
F.B.I. (and other agencies like the National Security Agency) unimpeded access
to all digital communications. <p>

In other words, the FCC would be given authority to dictate product design
in this fundamental regard. If such regulations are passed, vendors would have
180 days to comply. If they do not, they can be charged and fined $ 10,000 per
day for each day in violation. <p>

Faster police cars <p>

Even more incredibly, the proposed legislation decrees that any FCC
proceeding regarding design regulations, standards or registrations issued to
equipment vendors will be closed to the public and conducted in secret. <p>

The proposal has the potential to affect every single area touched by
digital media. It does not just limit the FCC's authority to traditional
telephones and newer digital telephony technology. It would affect all kinds of
computer communication, and likely radio communications as well. <p>

Of course, one of the big questions is how far "wiretap" extends into the
realm of non-voice digital communications - i.e., e-mail, document and file
transfer, the transmission of sound and video information - which are
increasingly in use today. Do files downloaded from the Internet constitute a
type of communication the F.B.I. needs to monitor? <p>

Those who've studied the proposal believe the answer is yes, in which case
it will affect everyone from standard computer network providers, who often
connect customers to the outside world via telephone lines and equipment, to
banks, whose automatic teller machines must use secure data lines to transmit
financial and customer identification information, and companies like Apple
Computer, now in the process of developing an entire lie of personal
communication devices. <p>

If encryption is outlawed ... As more proprietary information is sent over
networks, and as more systems are compromised by crackers, viruses and
electronic eavesdroppers, equipment and software vendors as mainstream as Apple
and Microsoft have begun incorporating high levels of security into their
systems via encryption. <p>

Cellular phone makers are doing the same thing. And as wireless
communication traffic increases, one can expect that powerful security and
 encryption products will only become more popular, since more people will have
access to interception technologies. <p>

Though not specifically listed as a target in the proposal, many people are
calling Digital Telephony "Son of S. 266," a failed Senate bill that required
the same "dumbing-down" for encryption as the F.B.I. proposal does for phone
systems. In other words, makers of encryption devices or software were to be
required to leave a "back door" open for law -enforcement and security agencies
that wanted to decode encrypted communication.  PAGE 64
                         Digital Media, April 20, 1992 <p>

The bill, of course, completely defeats the purpose of encryption - leaving
the "back door" open for the very same sophisticated techno-criminals that the
agencies were trying to thwart. S. 266 was shouted down last year by outraged
computer experts and civil libertarians. <p>

At the CFP conference, encryption expert Whitfield Diffie said, "I
understand why the police don't like encryption . But a very large part of the
essence of a free versus totalitarian society consists of the difference
between being answerable for your actions and being subject to prior restraint
against actions the society doesn't approve of." <p>

Making economic policy. Jim Bidzos, president of RSA Data Security, a
public-key encryption firm, says the issue is both personal privacy and
national competitiveness. The long-term effect of anti- encryption and related
 legislation is far worse than anything we've seen to date. <p>

"One could argue that economic policy is being made by the intelligence
agencies," he said during a CFP panel on encryption.  "That's not a good idea." <p>

What's happening, he says, is that electronic commerce is driving industry
and government into an adversarial role regarding encryption and data
protection. "Crypto is moving into mainstream products, and people who are
doing so now will want to continue," he says. "Government keeps trying to slip
language into bills that weakens their ability to do so. They need to stop
doing that. <p>

"What we really need is a national policy review - a Computer Security Act
advisory board to Congress. It's the single more important thing we can do.
We're long overdue to get some rational policy that will work for all of us." <p>

How about cable? Satellite? <p>

Cellular? <p>

But back to the F.B.I. proposal. Would the bill also have to restrict cable
equipment, also capable of digital tele-communicati on? The cellular phone and
data networks? Satellite communications? If monitoring of communications is
what the F.B.I. is interested in, the way the industry is moving today would
certainly indicate that any conduit of digital information would need to be
"tappable." <p>

Jerry Berman, director of the EFF's Washington DC office, certainly
believes that particular threat is implied. "It's one thing to get cooperation
from a phone company," he says. "It's another thing to go to CompuServe and
say, We want to tap into electronic mail.' Or We want to know, when you're
tapping into the line between EFF's Cambridge; whose data, voice, video is on
that line.  What's in the packet? It's getting much more complicated to
distinguish between different kinds of messages and different parties who are
being bundled together. Any kind of dumbing-down to separate that out is
contraintuitive to the most efficient use of this technology." <p>

As a Washington Post op-ed piece stated, the proposal is "an assault on
progress, on scientific endeavor and on the competitive position of American
industry. It's comparable to requiring Detroit to produce only automobiles that
can be overtaken by faster police cars." <p>

PAGE 65
                         Digital Media, April 20, 1992 <p>

The trouble with tapping <p>

It's true that the complexity of digital technology will make it harder, or
even impossible, for law enforcement to conduct its wiretaps in the manner to
which it has become accustomed. The prospect of techno-terrorists being able to
use computers and sophisticated encryption techniques to thwart
 law -enforcement officials is a frightening one. <p>

But it is important to remember that technology itself is never the
problem.  Technology only holds a magnifying glass to problems that already
exist, and the desire to seek remedy by somehow controlling or legislating
technology is a big step in the wrong direction. As Berman says, "If we can't
compress data and move it quickly through an ISDN or digital pipeline, to
improve the infrastructure of the U.S., because the Bureau's having trouble
wiretapping, then the whole future of our information age is at stake." <p>

To put the issue in perspective, you must first look at the present state
of affairs. William Sessions, director of the FBI, has stated publicly that so
far the Bureau has not yet had any difficulty executing a warrant because of
digital communications.  In addition, says Marc Rotenberg, director of the
Washington office of Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, we must
question why such far-reaching legislation is required for a law enforcement
procedure of last resort. <p>

Top of the charts. "I think the F.B.I. is sort of off the charts on this,"
says Rotenberg. "I know everyone else is talking about this as though they
believe we're going to have some reasonable discussion at some point, but where
they basically have come down on this issue is that the technology of the
digital network doesn't go forward until they can be assured that they can
continue to conduct wire surveillance." <p>

He says the proposal is contrary to the spirit of the wiretap law of 1968,
which is termed an investigative method of last resort. "It is the most
intrusive, most unbounded, most prone to abuse form of routine investigation,"
says Rotenberg. "For the F.B.I. to come back now and say that this is the
primary concern is just not tenable - it stands the law on its head." <p>

In addition, he says, the proposal is simply impractical. The Bureau cannot
reasonably expect to require every high tech firm in the United States to
ensure that its system complies with the FBI's needs and requirements of the
moment.  And the secrecy of the standards-setting hearings, he says, is a sure
way to bring technological innovation to a crawl. "Private computer firms and
researchers are already coming forward saying the best way to slow innovation
is to put up walls in the research community and start restricting information
on security practices." <p>

An impressive list of naysayers <p>

Factions from all corners of industry are rallying to fights the proposed
 legislation. <p>

The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), an industry watchdog for
networking issues, is helping organize vendors to oppose the bill. EFF
co-founder Mitch Kapor (also founder of Lotus Development) says there's an
"enormous coalition growing" in opposition to the legislation.  In fact, the
PAGE 66
                         Digital Media, April 20, 1992 <p>

EFF pulled together a coalition of concerned vendors and industry organizations
who signed a letter to Sen. Hollings on April 9, expressing deep concern over
the proposal. <p>

Signers included AT&amp;T, Cellular Telecommunications Industry Assoc.,
Computer &amp; Business Equipment Manufacturers Assoc., Computer &amp; Communications
Industry Assoc., Digital Equipment Corp., the Electronic Mail Assoc., GTE
Corp., IBM, the Information Industry Assoc., Lotus Development Corp., McCaw
Cellular Communications Inc., Microsoft Corp., NYNEX, Pacific Telesis Group,
Software Publishers Asso., Southwestern Bell, Telecommunications Industry
Assoc. and U.S.  West Inc. <p>

A spokeswoman for the influential Computer Systems Policy Project (CSPP),
an organization comprised of CEOs of the 12 computer manufacturers, says the
proposal has not yet been brought to the group as an issue, <p>

Tracking the issues <p>

The future of digital technologies depends on how we respond to the
increasing number of challenges from government and law enforcement agencies on
these critical issues. <p>

There are two industry organizations watchdogging these issues from a civil
liberties perspective that also have access to technical expertise through
their illustrious membership rosters. <p>

The Electronic Frontier Foundation has generously offered to send a copy of
the "Digital Telephony" to any interested party. <p>

Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility is based in Palo Alto, CA,
and its Washington, DC office tracks policy issues. <p>

Write your legislators. Most importantly, though, after getting up to speed
on the facts, is to contact your representatives in Congress. You can also call
Sen. Hollings, who is sponsoring the bill. The phone number is (202) 224-9340. <p>

Since the proposal has been drafted as an amendment rather than a separate
bill, people are worried that it might get slipped into a bill that has already
passed one house and be sent quietly to conference. That would be very bad. The
only way to make sure it doesn't happen is to let elected representatives know
it's not okay to shove this kind of proposal through without spirited debate,
discussions and public hearings. <p>

A tremendous blossoming <p>

A newly published report from Insight Research Corp. in Livingston, NJ -
called Multimedia Computing &amp; the Network: Applications and Telecommunications
1992-1997 - finds that in five years, 77 percent of all desktop, educational
and industrial PCs or workstations will have some communications capabilities.
"The network," says the executive summary," will function as a catalyst; it
will stimulate multimedia usage among users - and thereby increase
communications traffic." <p>

Interest and investment in digital communication is in the midst of a
tremendous blossoming, but it could be snuffed by the kind of restrictive PAGE
67
                         Digital Media, April 20, 1992 <p>

legislation proposed by the FBI. Here are just a few relevant news items from
the past month or so: * IBM Corp., Northern Telecom and Pacific Bell announced <p>

an alliance to research and field-test telecommunications <p>

network applications to speed up <p>

the creation of "Information Age services" such as <p>

teleconferencing and telecommuting. The idea is <p>

long-term evolution of the network, coupled with <p>

near-term creation of applications. * A new clearinghouse for miniaturized
computer <p>

technologies was formed by SRI International in <p>

Menlo Park, CA, called the Pocket Intelligence Forum. <p>

The program monitors and provides information <p>

on the technologies, applications and markets <p>

of so-called "pocket intelligence products" such as <p>

notebook, hand-held, palmtop and pen-top computers, <p>

and "related emerging devices." The forum <p>

will also monitor peripherals and software that <p>

support the emerging market, such as wireless <p>

communication and smart cards. * A recent study by the Information
Industries <p>

Group of Booz, Allen, &amp; Hamilton estimated that <p>

the number of cellular data subscribers in the U.S. <p>

will reach 13 million by the year 2000. * Japan's Ministries of Finance and
Posts &amp; Telecommunication <p>

are starting a major project to develop <p>

next-generation telecommunications equipment, <p>

and intend to fund major Japanese electronics firms <p>

with $ 1.2 billion to do so. * Dow Jones &amp; Co. and Nynex Corp. have agreed
to <p>

develop and jointly test a prototype service which PAGE 68
                         Digital Media, April 20, 1992 <p>

would allow Dow Jones to transmit video programming <p>

and information over the Nynex phone <p>

network. * Motorola Inc. announced that it would open the <p>

protocols used in its ARDIS nationwide radio data <p>

network, to spur the adoption of wireless data communication <p>

by mobile workers and allow third-party <p>

vendors to manufacture ARDIS-compatible <p>

terminals and/or modem devices. (ARDIS is a <p>

partnership between IBM and Motorola and the <p>

largest wireless data network in the country, covering <p>

80 percent of the population and more than 90 <p>

percent of the business activity in the U.S.) * ARDIS itself announced a
new service, in conjunction <p>

with a firm called Business Partner Solutions, <p>

that will allow application software vendors to integrate <p>

wireless data technology into their existing <p>

products easily and cheaply. * Motorola also opened several key
over-the-air protocols <p>

for use on shared systems as a catalyst to <p>

market growth. The protocols are available through <p>

a royalty-free license to manufacturers who wish to <p>

provide radio modems. The protocols are already <p>

selected as a standard by ARDIS (no surprise <p>

there), Bell-ARDIS is Canada, Deutsche Bundespost <p>

in Germany and Hutchison Mobile Data Ltd. <p>

in the U.K. <p>

The F.B.I. proposal <p>

The following is taken directly from a Federal Bureau of Investigation
document distributed to legislators and other concerned parties in Washington,
DC.  PAGE 69
                         Digital Media, April 20, 1992 <p>

Digital Telephony: <p>

Summary of Issues <p>

* The F.B.I. utilizes electronic surveillance (wire taps) <p>

in virtually every area of its investigative responsibilities. * The
telecommunications industry, which remained <p>

virtually unchanged for approximately 50 years, is <p>

now rapidly changing to address the need for more <p>

advanced telecommunications systems, such as <p>

personal communications networks, advanced cellular <p>

and integrated services digital networks <p>

(ISDN) which have the capacity for high-speed <p>

transmissions of video, voice and data. * One of the telephone
telecommunications industry's <p>

major developmental efforts is to provide total <p>

digital connectivity (end to end) for its subscribers, <p>

including residential and business communities, in <p>

the near future. * At present, no capability exists to intercept ISDN <p>

(digital) transmissions; therefore, the emergence of <p>

digital telecommunications technology will preclude <p>

the F.B.I. and all of law enforcement from <p>

being able to intercept electronic communications, <p>

thus all but eliminating a statutorily-sanctioned, <p>

court-authorized and extraordinarily successful investigate <p>

technique. * The Department of Justice and the F.B.I. have been <p>

working with the White House, various Administration <p>

agencies, the telecommunications industry <p>

and Congress to find a workable solution to this <p>

very serious problem that endangers the safety of <p>

PAGE 70
                         Digital Media, April 20, 1992 <p>

the American public. A legislative solution has been <p>

developed to ensure that the legitimate need for <p>

law enforcement to lawfully intercept communications <p>

is met by the telecommunications industry. <p>

Legislative Remedy <p>

The proposal would amend the Communications Act of 1934 to require
providers of electronic communications services and private branch exchanges to
ensure that the Government's ability to lawfully intercept communications is
unimpeded by the introduction of advanced digital telecommunications technology
or any other emerging telecommunications technology.  Specifically, the
amendment provides the following: 1. The FCC, in consultation with the Attorney
General, <p>

shall determine the technological interception <p>

needs of the Government and issue regulations that <p>

will preserve the Government's ability to conduct <p>

lawful electronic surveillance. 2. The FCC shall issue regulations within
120 days <p>

after enactment requiring the modification of existing <p>

telecommunication systems if those systems <p>

impede the Government's ability to conduct lawful <p>

electronic surveillance. 3. Compliance by service providers and private <p>

branch exchanges will be required within 180 days <p>

of the issuance of the regulations and the use of <p>

non-conforming equipment is prohibited thereafter. 4. The FCC has the
authority to compensate (through <p>

rate structure) telecommunication system operators <p>

under FCC jurisdiction for reasonable costs associated <p>

with required modifications of existing telecommunications <p>

equipment or technology. 5. The Attorney General has specific authority, in
addition <p>

to that already vested in the FCC, to seek <p>

civil penalties and injunctive relief for non-compliance.  PAGE 71
                         Digital Media, April 20, 1992 <p>

IAC-NUMBER: IAC 12224975 <p>

IAC-CLASS: Computer <p>

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH <p>

LOAD-DATE-MDC: December 28, 1993 <p>

PAGE 17
                 68TH STORY of Level 1 printed in FULL format. <p>

Copyright 1993 Information Access Company;
                             Copyright POINT 1993
                               Whole Earth Review <p>

June 22, 1993 <p>

SECTION: No. 79 ; Pg. 40; ISSN: 0749-5056 <p>

LENGTH: 12871 words <p>

HEADLINE: Cypherpunks, e-money and the technologies of disconnection;
 encryption technology; includes related articles; excerpt from book, 'Out of
Control' <p>

BYLINE: Kelly, Kevin <p>

BODY:
    IN TIM MAY'S EYES <p>

a digital tape is a weapon as potent and subversive as a shoulder-mounted
Stinger missile. May (fortyish, trim beard, exphysicist) holds up a $ 9.95
digital audio tape, or DAT. The cassette -- just slightly fatter than an
ordinary cassette -- contains a copy of a Mozart composition equivalent in
fidelity to a conventional digital compact disc. DAT can hold text as easily as
music. If the data is smartly compressed, one DAT purchased at K-Mart can hold
about 10,000 books in digital form. <p>

One DAT can also completely cloak a smaller library of information
interleaved within the music. Not only can the data of about 600 books (80
megabytes) be securely encrypted within a digital tape, but the library's
existence on the tape would be invisible even to powerful computers. In the
scheme May (and others) promote, a computer hard disk's worth of coded
information could be made to disappear inside an ordinary digital tape of
Michael Jackson's "Thriller." <p>

The vanishing act works as follows. DAT records music in sixteen binary
digits, but that precision is beyond perception. The difference contained in
the sixteenth bit of the signal is too small to be detectable by the human ear.
A long message -- a book of diagrams, a pile of data spreadsheets -- can be
submitted (in encrypted form) in the positions of all the sixteenth bits of
music. Anyone playing the tape would hear Michael Jackson crooning in the exact
digital quality they would hear on a purchased "Thriller" tape. Anyone
examining the tape with a computer would see only digital music. Only by
matching an untampered-with tape with the encrypted one bit by bit on a
computer could someone detect the difference. Even then, the random-looking
differences would appear to be noise acquired while duping a digital tape
through an analog CD player (as is normally done).  Finally, this "noise" would
have to be decrypted (not likely) to prove that it was something other than
noise. <p>

"What this means," says May, "is that already it is totally hopeless to
stop the flow of bits across borders. Because anyone carrying a single music
cassette bought in a store could carry the entire computerized files of the
Stealth bomber, and it would be completely and totally imperceptible." One tape
contains disco music. The other tape contains disco and the essential
blueprints of a key technology.  PAGE 18
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

Music isn't the only way to hide things, either. "I've done this with
photos," says May. "I take a digitized photo posted on the net, download it
into Adobe Photoshop, and then strip an encrypted message into the least
significant bit in each pixel.  When I repost the image, it is essentially
indistinguishable from the original." <p>

The other thing May is into is wholly anonymous transactions. If one takes
the encryption methods developed by military agencies and transplants them into
the vast terrain of electronic networks, very powerful -- and very unbreakable
-- technologies of anonymous dealing become possible. Two complete strangers
could solicit or supply information to each other, and consummate the exchange
with money, without the least chance of being traced. That's something that
cannot securely be done with phones and the post office now. <p>

It's not just spies and organized crime who are paying attention to this
technology. Efficient means of authentication and verification, such as smart
cards, tamperproof networks, and micro-size encryption chips, are driving the
cost of ciphers down to the consumer level. <p>

Encryption is now affordable for everyman. <p>

The upshot of all this, Tim believes, is the end of corporations in their
current form and the beginning of more sophisticated untaxed black markets. Tim
calls this movement Crypto-Anarchy. "I have to tell you I think there is a
coming war between two forces," Tim May confides to me. "One force wants full
disclosure, an end to secret dealings. That's the government going after pot
smokers and controversial bulletin boards. The other force wants privacy and
civil liberties. In this war, encryption wins. Unless the government is
successful in banning encryption, which it won't be, encryption always wins." <p>

A couple of years ago, May wrote a manifesto to alert the world to the
advent of widespread encryption.  In this electronic broadside, published on
the net, he warned of the coming "specter of crypto anarchy.": <p>

The State will of course try to slow or halt the spread of this technology,
citing national security concerns, use of the technology by drug dealers and
tax evaders, and fears of societal disintegration. Many of these concerns will
be valid; crypto anarchy will allow national secrets to be traded freely and
will allow illicit and stolen materials to be traded. An anonymous computerized
market will even make possible abhorrent markets for assassinations and
extortion. Various criminal and foreign elements will be active users of
CryptoNet. But this will not halt the spread of crypto anarchy. <p>

Just as the technology of printing altered and reduced the power of
medieval guilds and the social power structure, so too will cryptologic methods
fundamentally alter the nature of corporations and of government interference
in economic transactions.  Combined with emerging information markets, crypto
anarchy will create a liquid market for any and all material which can be put
into words and pictures. And just as a seemingly minor invention like barbed
wire made possible the fencing-off of vast ranches and farms, thus altering
forever the concepts of land and property rights in the frontier West, so too
will the seemingly minor discovery out of an arcane branch of mathematics come
to be the wire clippers which dismantle the barbed wire around intellectual
property.  PAGE 19
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

The manifesto was signed: <p>

Timothy C. May, Crypto Anarchy: encryption, digital money, anonymous
networks, digital pseudonyms, zero knowledge, reputations, information markets,
black markets, collapse of government. <p>

I asked May, a retired Intel physicist, to explain the connection between
 encryption and the collapse of society as we know it. May explained: "Medieval
guilds would monopolize information. When someone tried to make leather or
silver outside the guilds, the King's men came in and pounded on them because
the guild paid a levy to the King. What broke the medieval guilds was printing;
someone could publish a treatise on how to tan leather. In the age of printing,
corporations arose to monopolize certain expertise, like gunsmithing or making
steel. Now encryption will cause the erosion of the current corporate monopoly
on expertise and proprietary knowledge. Corporations won't be able to keep
secrets because of how easy it will be to sell information on the nets." <p>

The reason crypto-anarchy hasn't broken out yet, according to May, is that
the military has a monopoly on the key knowledge of encryption -- just as the
Church once tried to control printing. With few exceptions, encryption
technology has been invented by and for the world's military organizations. To
say that the military is secretive about this technology would be an
understatement. Very little developed by the US National Security Agency (NSA)
-- whose mandate it is to develop crypto-systems -- has ever trickled down for
civilian use, unlike technologies spun off from the rest of the
military/industrial alliance. <p>

But who needs encryption, anyway? Only people with something to hide,
perhaps. Spies, criminals, and malcontents. People whose appetite for
 encryption may be thwarted righteously, effectively, and harshly. <p>

The ground shifted two decades ago, when the information age arrived and
intelligence became the chief asset of corporations. Intelligence was no longer
the monopoly of the Central Intelligence Agency, but the subject of seminars
for CEOs.  Spying meant corporate spying. Illicit transfer of corporate
knowhow, rather than military plans, became the treasonous information the
state had to worry about. <p>

In addition, within the last decade, computers became fast and cheap;
enciphering no longer demanded supercomputers and the super-budgets needed to
run them. A generic-brand PC picked up at a garage sale could handle the
massive computations a public-key encryption scheme required. For small
companies running their entire business on PCs, encryption was a tool they
wanted on their hard disks. <p>

And now, within the last few years, a thousand electronic networks have
blossomed into one highly decentralized network of networks. A network is a
distributed thing; if one part breaks, the workload is routed around that
failing, and the whole net keeps flying. There are few centers of control, and
few clear boundaries. How do you secure something that doesn't even know how
big it is? Certain types of encryption, it turns out, are an ideal way to bring
security to a decentralized system while keeping the system flexible. Rather
than trying to seal out trouble with a rigid wall of security, networks can
tolerate all kinds of crap if a large portion of their members use peer-to-peer
 encryption.  Suddenly, encryption has become incredibly useful to ordinary <p>

PAGE 20
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

people who have "nothing to hide" but their privacy. Peer-to-peer encryption,
sown into the net, linked with electronic payments, tied into everyday business
deals, becomes just another business tool, like fax machines or credit cards. <p>

dollars funded the military ownership of this technology -- want the
technology back. <p>

But the government (at least the US government) may not give encryption
back to the people for a number of antiquated reasons. So, for the past year or
so, a loose federation of creative math hackers, civil libertarians,
free-market advocates, genius programmers, renegade cryptologists, and sundry
other frontier folk, has been creating, assembling, or appropriating encryption
technology to plug into the net. Some of them call themselves cypherpunks. <p>

On a couple of Saturdays, I join Tim May and about fifteen other
crypto-rebels for their monthly cypherpunk meeting, held near Palo Alto, CA.
The group meets in a typically non-descript office complex full of small
hi-tech startup companies. It could be anywhere in Silicon Valley. The room has
corporate-gray carpeting and a conference table. The moderator for this
meeting, Eric Hughes, tries to quite the cacophony of loud, opinionated voices.
Hughes, with sandy hair halfway down his back, grabs a marker and scribbles the
agenda on a whiteboard. The items he writes down echo Tim May's digital card:
reputations, PGP encryption, anonymous remailer update, and the Diffey-Hellmann
key exchange paper. <p>

After a bit of gossip the group gets down to business. It's class time. One
member, Dean Tribble, stands up front to report on his research on digital
reputations. If you are trying to do business with people you know only as
names introducing some email, how can you be sure they are legit? Tribble
suggests that you can buy a reputation from a "trust escrow" -- a company
similar to a title or bond company that would guarantee someone for a fee. He
explains the lesson from game theory concerning iterated negotiation games,
like the Prisoner's Dilemma; how payoffs shift when playing the game over and
over instead of just once, and how important reputations become in iterated
relationships. The potential problems of buying and selling reputations online
are chewed on, and suggestions of new directions for research are made, before
Tribble sits down and another member stands to give a brief talk. Around the
table it goes. <p>

Arthur Abraham, dressed in heavy, studded black leather, reviews a recent
technical paper on encryption.  Abraham flicks an overhead projector on, whips
out some transparencies painted with equations, and walks the group through the
mathematical proof.  It is clear that the math is not easy for most. Sitting
around the table are programmers (many self-taught), engineers, consultants --
all very smart -- but only a single member is equipped with a background in
mathematics. "What do you mean by that?" questions one quiet fellow as Abraham
talks. "Oh, I see, you forgot the modulus," chimes in another guy. "Is that a
to the x or a to the y?" The amateur crypto-hackers challenge each statement,
asking for clarification, mulling it over until each understands. The hacker
mind, the programmer's drive to whittle things down to an elegant minimum, to
seek shortcuts, confronts the academic stance of the paper. Pointing to a large
hunk of one equation, Dean Tribble asks, "Why not just scrap all this?" A voice
from the back: "That's a great question, and I think I know why not." So the
voice explains. Dean nods. Arthur looks around to be sure everyone got it. Then
he goes on to the next line in the paper; those who understand help out those
PAGE 21
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

who don't. Soon the room is full of people saying, Oh, that means you can serve
this up on a network configuration! Hey, cool!  And another tool for
distributed computing is born; another component is transferred from shroud of
military secrecy to the open web of the net; another brick is set into the
foundation of public encryption. <p>

The main thrust of the group's efforts takes place in the virtual online
space of the Cypherpunk electronic mailing list. A growing crowd of crypto-hip
folks from around the world interact daily via an Internet "mailing list." Here
they pass around code-in-progress as they attempt to implement ideas on the
cheap (such as digital signatures), or discuss the ethical and political
implications of what they are doing. An anonymous subset of them has launched
the Information Liberation Front. <p>

The ILE locates scholarly papers on cryptology appearing in very expensive
(and very hard-to-find) journals, scans them in by computer, and "liberates"
them from their copyright restrictions by posting the articles anonymously to
the net. <p>

Posting anything anonymously to the net is quite hard: the nature of the
net is to track everything infallibly, and to duplicate items promiscuously. It
is theoretically trivial to monitor transmission nodes in order to backtrack a
message to its source. In such a climate of potential omniscience, the
crypto-rebels yearn for true anonymity. <p>

I confess my misgivings about the potential market for anonymity to Tim:
"Seems like the perfect thing for ransom notes, extortion threats, bribes,
blackmail, insider trading and terrorism." "Well," Tim answers, "what about
selling information that isn't viewed as legal, say about pot-growing,
do-it-yourself abortion, cryonics, or even peddling alternative medical
information without a license? What about the anonymity wanted for
whistleblowers, confessionals, and dating personals?" <p>

Digital anonymity is needed, the crypto-rebels feel, because anonymity is
as important a civil tool as authentic identification is. Pretty good anonymity
is offered by the post office; you don't need to give a return address, and the
post office doesn't verify it if you do. Telephones (without caller ID) and
telegrams are likewise anonymous (to a rough degree). And everyone has a right
(upheld by the Supreme Court) to distribute anonymous handbills and pamphlets.
Anonymity stirs the most fervor among those who spend hours each day in
networked communications. Ted Kaehler, a programmer at Apple Computer, believes
that "our society is in the midst of a privacy crisis." He sees encryption as
an extension of such all-American institutions as the post office. "We have
always valued the privacy of the mails. Now, for the first time, we don't have
to trust in it; we can enforce it." John Gilmore, a crypto-freak who sits on
the board of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, says, "We clearly have a
societal need for anonymity in our basic communications media." <p>

A pretty good society needs more than just anonymity. An online
civilization requires online anonymity, online identification, online
authentication, online reputations, online trustholders, online signatures,
online privacy, and online access. All are essential ingredients of any open
society. The cypherpunks' agenda is to build the tools that provide digital
equivalents to the interpersonal conventions we have in face-to-face society,
and hand them out for free. By the time they are done, the cypherpunks hope to
have given away free PAGE 22
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

digital signatures, as well as the opportunity for online anonymity.(1) <p>

To create digital anonymity, the cypherpunks have developed about fifteen
prototype versions of an anonymous remailer that would, when fully implemented,
make it impossible to determine the source of an possible to determine the
source of an email message, even under intensive monitoring of communication
lines. One stage of the remailer works today. When you use it to mail Alice,
she gets a message from you that says it is from "nobody." Unraveling where it
came from is trivial for any computer capable of monitoring the entire network
-- a feat few can afford. But to be mathematically untraceable, the remailers
have to work in a relay of at least two (more is better) -- one remailer
handing off a message to the next remailer, diluting information about its
source to nothing as it is passed along. <p>

Eric Hughes sees a role for digital pseudonymity -- your identity is known
by some but not by others. When cloaked pseudonymously, "You could join a
collective to purchase some information and decrease your actual cost by orders
of magnitude -- that is, until it is almost free." A digital co-op could form a
private online library and collectively purchase digital movies, albums,
software, and expensive newsletters, which they would "lend" to each other over
the net. The vendor selling the information would have absolutely no way of
determining whether he was selling to one person or five hundred. Hughes sees
these kinds of arrangements peppered into an information-rich society as
"increasing the margins where the poor can survive." <p>

"One thing for sure," Tim says, "long term, this stuff nukes tax
collection." I venture the rather lame observation that this may be one reason
the government isn't handing the technology back. I also offer the speculation
that an escalating arms race with a digital IRS might evolve. For every new
avenue the digital underground invents to disguise transactions, the digital
IRS will counter with a surveillance method. Tim pooh-poohs the notion.
"Without a doubt, this stuff is unbreakable.  Encryption always wins." <p>

The Fax Effect <p>

Encryption always wins because it follows the logic of the net. A given
public-key encryption key can eventually be cracked by a supercomputer working
on the problem long enough. Those who have codes they don't want cracked try to
stay ahead of the supercomputers by increasing the length of their keys (the
longer a key is the harder it is to crack) -- but at the cost of making the
safeguard more unwieldy and slow to use. However, any code can be deciphered,
given enough time or money. As Eric Hughes often reminds fellow cypherpunks, "
Encryption is economics.  Encryption is always possible, just expensive." It
took A.  Shamir a year to break a 120-digit key using a network of distributed
Sun workstations working part-time. A person could use a key so long that no
supercomputer could crack it for the foreseeable future, but it would be
awkward to use in daily life. A buildingful of NSA's specially hotrodded
supercomputers might take a day to crack a 140-digit code today. But that is a
full day's commitment of big iron to open just one lousy key! <p>

Cypherpunks intend to level the playing field against centralized computer
resources with the Fax Effect. If you have the only fax machine in the world,
it is worth nothing. But with every other fax installed in the world, your fax
machine increases in value. In fact, the more faxes in the world, the more
valuable everybody's fax becomes. This is the logic of the net, also known as
PAGE 23
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

the law of increasing returns. It goes contrary to classical economic theories
of wealth based on equilibratory tradeoff. These state that you can't get
something from nothing; the truth is, you can. (Only now are a few radical
professors formalizing this notion.) Hackers, cypherpunks, and many hi-tech
entrepreneurs already know that in network economics, more brings more. This is
why giving things away so often works, and why the cypherpunks want to pass out
their tools gratis. It has less to do with charity than with the clear
intuition that network economics reward the more and not the less -- and you
can seed the "more" at the start by giving the tools away. (The cypherpunks
also talk about using the economics of the net for the reverse side of
encryption: to crack codes. They could assemble a people's supercomputer by
networking together a million Macintoshes, each one computing a coordinated
little part of a huge, distributed decryption program. In theory such a
decentralized parallel computer would, in sum, be the most powerful computer we
can now imagine -- far greater than the centralized NSA's.) <p>

Encryption taps the Fax Effect. If you are the only person using
 encryption, you are a lightning rod for an attempted cracking. But your keys
become more valuable as more people use encryption, because this lessens the
possibility of your key being cracked. Just as with fax, the more people using
 encryption, the more valuable it becomes for all. The world's most powerful
supercomputer grinds all day to crack one key. What is it going to do when 100
million people each use 100 different keys per day? <p>

The idea of choking Big Brother with a deluge of petty, heavily encrypted
messages so tickles the imagination of crypto-rebels that one of them came up
with a freeware version of a highly regarded public-key encryption scheme. The
software is called PGP, for Pretty Good Privacy. The code has been passed out
on the nets for free and made available on disk. In certain parts of the net it
is quite common to see messages encrypted with PGP, with a note that the
sender's public key is "available upon request." <p>

PGP is not the only encryption freeware. On the nets, cypherpunks can grab
RIPEM, a software application for privacy-enhanced mail. Both PGP and RIPEM are
based on RSA, a patented implementation of encryption algorithms. But while
RIPEM is distributed as public-domain software by RSA (the company), Pretty
Good Privacy software is homebrew code concocted by a crypto-rebel named Philip
Zimmermann. Because Pretty Good Privacy uses RSA's patented math, it's
outlaw-ware. <p>

RSA was developed at MIT -- partly with federal funds -- but was later
licensed to the academic researchers who invented it.  The researchers
published their crypto-methods before they filed for patents, out of fear that
the NSA would hold up the patents or even prevent the civilian use of their
system. In the US, inventors have a year after publication to file patents. But
the rest of the world requires patents before publication, so RSA could secure
only US patents on its system. PGP's use of RSA's patented mathematics is
legitimate overseas. But PGP is commonly exchanged in the no-place of the net
(what country's jurisdiction prevails in cyberspace?), where the law on
intellectual property is still a bit murky, and close to the beginnings of
cryptoanarchy.  Pretty Good Privacy deals with this legal tarbaby by notifying
its American users that it is their responsibility to secure from RSA a license
for use of PGP's underlying algorithm. (Sure. Right.)  PAGE 24
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

Zimmermann claims he released the quasilegal PGP into the world because he
was concerned that the government would reclaim all public-key encryption
technology, including RSA's. RSA can't stop distribution of existing versions
of PGP because once something goes onto the net, it never comes back. But it's
hard for RSA to argue damages: both the outlaw PGP and the officially
sanctioned RIPEM infect the net to produce the Fax Effect. PGP encourages
consumer use of
 encryption -- the more use, the better for everyone in the business. Pretty
Good Privacy is freeware; like most freeware, its users will sooner or later
graduate to commercially supported stuff. Only RSA offers the license for that
at the moment.  Economically, what could be better for a patentholder than to
have a million people use the buddy system to teach themselves about the
intricacies and virtues of your product (as pirated and distributed by others),
and then wait in line to buy your stuff when they want the best? <p>

The Fax Effect, the rule of freeware upgrade, and the power of distributed
intelligence are all part of an emerging network economics. Tim May even sees
the rise of encryption and the downfall of corporations as part of this new
economics. ("Big monolithic corporations will become virtual corporations," he
says, "a temporary ensemble of skilled people. They'll nucleate for six months
to make a product, say a Hollywood film, and then the virtual corporation will
dissipate and vanish.")  Corporations will become shifting network ghosts in a
networked world. <p>

Politics in a network economy will definitely require the kind of tools the
cypherpunks are playing with. Glenn Tenney, chairman of the annual Hackers'
Conference, ran for public office in California last year using the computer
networks for campaigning, and came away with a realistic grasp of how they will
shape politics. He notes that digital techniques for establishing trust are
needed for electronic democracy. He writes online, "Imagine if a Senator
responds to some email, but someone alters the response and then sends it on to
the NY Times? Authentication, digital signatures, etc. are essential for
protection of all sides."  Encryption and digital signatures are techniques to
expand the dynamics of trust into a new territory.  Encryption cultivates a
"web of trust" says Phil Zimmermann, the very web that is the heart of any
society or human network. The short form of the cypherpunk's obsession with
 encryption can be summarized as: Pretty good privacy means pretty good
society. <p>

One of the consequences of network economics, as facilitated by ciphers and
digital technology, is the transformation of what we mean by pretty good
privacy. Networks shift privacy from the realm of morals to the marketplace;
privacy becomes a commodity. <p>

A telephone directory has value because of the energy it saves a caller in
finding a particular phone number. When telephones were new, having an
individual number to list in a directory was valuable to the lister and to all
other telephone users (the Fax Effect). But today, in a world full of easily
obtained telephone numbers, an unlisted phone number is more valuable to the
unlisted (who pay more) and to the phone company (which charges more). Privacy
is a commodity to be priced and sold. <p>

Most privacy transactions will soon take place in the marketplace, rather
than in government offices, because a centralized government is handicapped in
a distributed, open-weave network, and can no longer guarantee how things are
connected or not connected. Hundreds of privacy vendors will sell bits of <p>

PAGE 25
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

privacy at market rates. You hire Little Brother, Inc. to demand maximum
payment from junk-mail and direct marketers when you sell your name, and to
monitor uses of that information as it tends to escape into the net. On your
behalf, Little Brother, Inc.  negotiates with other privacy vendors for hired
services such as personal encrypters, absolutely unlisted numbers, bozo
filters, stranger-ID screeners (such as caller ID on phones that only accept
calls from certain numbers), and for hired mechanical agents (called network
"knowbots") to trace addresses, and for counter-knowbots that unravel traces of
your own activities. <p>

Privacy is a type of information that has its polarity reversed; I imagine
it as anti-information. The removal of a bit of information from a system can
be seen as the reproduction of a corresponding bit of anti-information. In a
world flooded with information ceaselessly replicating itself to the edges of
the net, the absence or vaporization of a bit of information becomes very
valuable, especially if that absence can be maintained. In a world where
everything is connected to everything -- where connection and information and
knowledge are dirt cheap -- then disconnection and anti-information and
no-knowledge become expensive. When bandwidth becomes free and entire gigabytes
of information are swapped around the clock, what you don't want to communicate
becomes the most difficult chore.  Encryption systems and their ilk are
technologies of disconnection. They attempt to tame the network's innate
tendency to connect and inform without discrimination. <p>

The Next Utility Meter <p>

We manage the disconnection of other domestic utilities, such as water or
electricity, through metering. But metering is neither obvious nor easy. Thomas
Edison's dazzling electrical gizmos were of little use to anyone until people
had easy access to electricity in their factories and homes. So, at the peak of
his career, Edison diverted his attention away from designing electrical
delivery network itself. At first, very little was settled about how
electricity should be created (DC or AC?), carried, or billed. For billing,
Edison favored the approach that most information-providers today favor: charge
a flat fee.  Readers pay the same for a newspaper no matter how much of it they
read. Ditto for cable TV, books and computer software. All are priced flat for
all you can use. <p>

Edison pushed a flat fee for electricity -- a fixed amount if you are
connected, nothing if you aren't -- because he felt that the costs of
accounting for differential usage would exceed the cost of the variances in
electricity usage. But mostly Edison was stymied about how to meter
electricity. For the first six months of his General Electric Lighting Company
in New York City, customers paid a flat fee. To Edison's chagrin, that didn't
work out economically. Edison was forced to come up with a stopgap solution.
His remedy, an electrolytic meter, was erratic and impractical. It froze in
winter, sometimes it ran backwards, and customers couldn't read it (nor did
they trust the meter readers). It wasn't until a decade after municipal
electrical networks were up and running that another inventor came up with a
reliable watt-hour meter. Now we can hardly imagine buying electricity any
other way. <p>

A hundred years later, the information industry still lacks an information
meter. George Gilder, hi-tech gadfly, puts the problem this way: "Rather than
having to pay for the whole reservoir every time you are thirsty, what you want
is to only pay for a glass of water."  PAGE 26
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

Indeed, why buy an ocean of information when all you want is a drink? <p>

No reason at all, if you have an information meter. Entrepreneur Peter
Sprague believes he has just invented one. "We use encryption to force the
metering of information," says Sprague. His spigot is a microchip that doles
out small bits of information from a huge pile of encrypted data. Instead of
selling a CD-ROM crammed with a hundred thousand pages of legal documents for $
2,000, Sprague invented a ciphering device that would dispense the documents
off the CD-ROM at $ 1 per page. A user only pays for what she uses, and can use
only what she pays for. <p>

Sprague's way of selling information per-page is to make each page
unreadable until it is decrypted. Working from a catalog of contents, a user
selects a range of information to browse. She reads the abstract or summaries
(and is charged a minuscule amount). Then she selects a full text, which is
decrypted by her dispenser. Each act of decryption rings up a small charge
(maybe fifty cents). The charge is tallied by a metering chip in her dispenser
that deducts the amount from a prepaid account (also stored on the metering
chip), much as a postage meter deducts credit while dispensing postage tapes.
When the CD-ROM credit runs out, she calls a central office, which replenishes
her account via an encrypted message sent on a modem line running into her
computer's metering chip. Her dispenser now has $ 300 credit to spend on
information -- by the page, by the paragraph, or by the stock price, depending
on how fine the vendor is cutting it. <p>

What Sprague's encryption -metering device does is decouple information's
fabulous ease in being copied from its owners' need to have it selectively
disconnected. It lets information flow freely and ubiquitously -- like water
through a town's plumbing -- by metering it out in usable chunks. Metering
converts information into a utility. <p>

The cypherpunks note, quite correctly, that this will not stop hackers from
siphoning off free information. The Videocipher encryption system, used to
meter satellite-delivered TV programs such as HBO and Showtime, was compromised
within weeks of its introduction. Despite claims by its manufacturer that the
encrypto-metering chip was unhackable, big moneymaking scams capitalized on
hacks around the codes. (The scams were set up on Indian reservations -- but
that's a whole 'nother story).  Pirates would find a descrambler box with a
valid subscription -- in a hotel room, for instance -- and then clone the
identity into other chips. A consumer would send the box to the reservation for
"repairs," and it would come back with a new chip cloned with the identity of
the hotel box. The broadcasting system couldn't perceive clones in the
audience.  In short, the system was hacked not by cracking the code, but by
subverting places where the code tied into the other parts of the system. <p>

No system is hack-proof. But disruptions of an encrypted system require
deliberate creative energy. Information meters can't stop thievery or hacking,
but meters can counteract the effects of lazy mooching and the natural human
desire to share. The Videocipher satellite-TV system eliminates user piracy on
a mass scale -- the type of piracy that plagued the TV outback before
scrambling, and that still plagues the lands of software and photocopying.
Encryption makes pirating a chore, and not something that any slouch with a
blank disk can do. Satellite encryption works overall because encryption always
wins.  PAGE 27
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

Peter Sprague's crypto-meter permits Alice to make as many copies of the
encrypted CD-ROMs as she likes, since she pays only for what she uses.
Crypto-metering, in essence, disengages the process of payment from the process
of duplication. This disconnection follows the bias of information. <p>

Using encryption to force the metering of information works, because it
does not constrain information's desire to reproduce. All things being equal, a
bit of information will replicate through an available network until it fills
that network.  With an animate drive, every fact naturally proliferates as many
times as possible. The more fit -- the more interesting or useful -- a fact is,
the wider it spreads. A pretty metaphor compares the spread of genes through a
population with the similar spread of ideas, or memes, in a population. Both
genes and memes depend on a network of replicating machines -- cells or brains
or computer terminals. A network, in this general sense, is a swarm of flexibly
interconnected nodes, each of which can copy (either exactly or with variation)
a message taken from another node. A population of butterflies and a flurry of
email messages have the same mandate: replicate or die. Information wants to be
copied. <p>

Our digital society has built a supernetwork of copiers out of hundreds of
millions of personal faxes, library photocopiers, and desktop hard disks. It is
as if our information society is one huge aggregate copy machine. But we won't
let this super machine copy. Much to everyone's surprise, information created
in one corner finds its way into all the other corners rather quickly. Because
our previous economy was built upon scarcity of goods, we have so far fought
the natural fecundity of information by trying to control every act of
replication as it occurs. We take a massively parallel copy machine and try to
stifle most
 acts of reproduction. As in other puritanical regimes, this doesn't work.
Information wants to be copied. <p>

"Free the bits!" shouts Tim May. This sense of the word "free" shifts
Stewart Brand's oft-quoted maxim, "Information wants to be free" -- as in
"without cost" -- to the more subtle "without chains or imprisonment."
Information wants to be free to wander and reproduce. Success, in a networked
world of decentralized nodes, belongs to those plans that do not resist either
the replication or roaming urges of information. <p>

Sprague's encrypted meter capitalizes on the distinction between pay and
copy. "It is easy to make software count how many times it has been invoked,
but hard to make it count how many times it has been copied," says software
architect Brad Cox. In a message broadcast on the Internet, Cox writes: <p>

Software objects differ from tangible objects in being fundamentally unable
to monitor their copying but trivially able to monitor their use....So why not
build an information age market economy around this difference between
manufacturing age and information age goods? If revenue collection were based
on monitoring the use of software inside a computer, vendors could dispense
with copy protection altogether. <p>

Cox is a software developer specializing in a new species of modular
software code called object-oriented programming (OOP).  OOP delivers two
magnificent improvements over conventional software. First, OOP provides the
user with applications that are more fluid, more interoperable with various
tasks -- sort of like a house with movable "object" furniture instead of a
house saddled with built-in furniture. Second, OOP provides software developers
the PAGE 28
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

ability to "reuse" modules of software, whether they wrote the modules
themselves or purchased them from someone else. To build a database, an OOP
designer like Cox takes a sort routine, a field manager, a form generator, an
icon handler, etc., and assembles the program, instead of rewriting a working
whole from scratch. Cox developed a set of cool OOP objects that he sold to
Steve Jobs to use in his Next machine, but selling small bits of modular code
as a regular business has been slow. It is similar to trying to peddle
limericks one by one. To recoup the great cost of writing an individual object
by selling it outright would garner too few sales, but selling it by copy is
too hard to monitor or control. But if objects could generate revenue each time
a user activated them, then an author could make a living creating them. <p>

While contemplating the possible market for OOP objects that were sold on a
"per-use" plan, Cox uncovered the natural grain in networked intelligence: Let
the copies flow, and pay per use. He says, "The premise is that copy protection
is exactly the wrong idea for intangible, easily copied goods such as software.
You want information-age goods to be freely distributed and freely acquired via
whatever distribution means you want. You are positively encouraged to download
software from networks, give copies to your friends, or send it as junk mail to
people you've never met. Broadcast my software from satellites. Please!" <p>

Cox adds (in echo of Peter Sprague, although, surprisingly, the two are
unfamiliar with each other's work): "This generosity is possible because the
software is actually 'meterware.' It has strings attached that make revenue
collection independent of how the software was distributed." <p>

Cox calls this system "superdistribution," a name given by Japanese
researchers to a similar method they devised to track the flow of software
through a network. "The approach is called superdistribution," Cox says,
"because, like superconductivity, it lets information flow freely, without
resistance from copy protection or piracy." The model is the successful balance
of copyright and userights worked out by the music and radio industries.
Musicians earn money not only by selling customers a copy of their work, but by
selling broadcast stations a "use" of their music. The copies are supplied
free, sent to radio stations in a great flood by the musicians' agents. The
stations sort through this tide of free music, paying royalties only for the
music they broadcast, as metered (statistically) by two agencies representing
musicians, ASCAP and BMI. <p>

JEIDA, a Japanese consortium of computer manufacturers, developed a chip
and a protocol that allows each Macintosh on a network to freely replicate
software while metering userights. According to Ryoichi Mori, the head of
JEIDA, "Each computer is thought of as a station that broadcasts, not the
software itself, but the use of the software, to an audience of a single
'listener.'"  Each time your Mac "plays" a piece of software, or a software
component from among thousands freely available, it triggers a royalty.
Commercial radio and TV provide an "existence proof" of a working
superdistribution system, in which the copies are disseminated free and the
stations only pay for what they use.  Musicians would be quite happy if one
radio station made copies of their tapes and distributed them to other stations
("Free the bits!"), because it increases the likelihood of some station using
their music. <p>

JEIDA envisions software percolating through large computer networks
unencumbered by restrictions on copying or mobility.  Like Cox, Sprague, and
the cypherpunks, JEIDA counts on public-key encryption to keep these counts
PAGE 29
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

private and untampered as they are transmitted to the credit center. Peter
Sprague says plainly, "Encrypted metering is an ASCAP for intellectual
property." <p>

Cox's electronically disseminated pamphlet on superdistribution sums up the
virtues very nicely: <p>

Whereas software's ease of replication is a liability today,
superdistribution makes it an asset. Whereas software vendors must spend
heavily to overcome software's invisibility, superdistribution thrusts software
out into the world to serve as its own advertisement. Whereas the personal
computer revolution isolates individuals inside a standalone personal computer,
superdistribution establishes a cooperative/competitive community around an
information age market economy. <p>

A hoary orge known as the Pay-Per-View Problem haunts the information
economy. In the past this monster ate billions of dollars in failed corporate
attempts to sell movies, databases, or music recordings on a per-view or
per-use basis. The ogre still lives. The problem is, people are reluctant to
pay in advance for information they haven't seen because of their hunch that
they might not find it useful. They are equally unwilling to pay after they
have seen it, because their hunch usually proves correct: they could have lived
without it.  Can you imagine being asked to pay after you've seen a movie?
Medical knowledge is the only type of information that can be easily sold sight
unseen, because the buyers believe they can't live without it. <p>

The ogre is usually slain with sampling. Moviegoers are persuaded to pay
beforehand by lapel-grabbing trailers. Software is loaned among friends for
trial; books and magazines are browsed in the bookstore. <p>

The other way to slay the problem is by lowering the price of admission.
Newspapers are cheap: we pay before looking. The ingenious thing about
information-metering is that it delivers two solutions: it provides a spigot
that records how much data is used, and it provides a spigot that can be turned
down to a cheap trickle.  Encryption metering chops big expensive data hunks
into small inexpensive doses of data. People will readily pay for bits of cheap
information before viewing, particularly if the payment invisibly deducts
itself from an account. <p>

The fine granularity of information-metering gets Peter Sprague excited.
When asked for an example of how fine it could get, he volunteers one so fast
it's obvious that he has been giving it some thought. "Say you want to write
obscene limericks from your house in Telluride, Colorado. If you could write
one obscene limerick a day, we can probably find 10,000 people in the world who
want to pay ten cents a day to get it. We'll collect $ 365,000 per year and pay
you $ 120,000, and then you can ski for the rest of your life." In no other
kind of marketplace would one measly limerick, no matter how bawdy and clever,
be worth selling on its own. Maybe a book of them -- an ocean of limericks --
but not one. Yet in an electronic marketplace, a single limerick -- the
information equivalent of a stick of gum -- is worth producing and offering for
sale. <p>

Sprague ticks off a list of other fine-grained items that might be traded
in such a marketplace. He catalogs what he'd pay for right now: "I want the
weather in Prague for twenty-five cents per month, I want my stocks updated for
50 cents a stock, I want the Dines Letter for $ 12 a week, I want the
congestion report <p>

PAGE 30
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

from O'Hare Airport updated continuously because I'm always getting stuck in
Chicago, so I'll pay a buck per month for that, and I want 'Hagar the Horrible'
for a nickel a day." Each of these products is currently either given away
scattershot, or peddled in the aggregate very expensively. Sprague's
electronically mediated marketplace would "unbundle" the data, and deliver a
narrowly selected piece of information to your desktop or mobile palmtop for a
reasonable price.  Encryption would meter it out, preventing you from filching
other tiny bits of data that would hardly be worth protecting (or selling) in
other ways. In essence, the ocean of information flows through you, but you
only pay for what you drink. <p>

At the moment, this particular technology of disconnection exists as a $ 95
circuitboard that can slide into a personal computer and plug into a phone
line.  To encourage established computer manufacturers such as Hewlett-Packard
and Kalieda to hardwire a similar board into units coming off their assembly
line, Sprague's company, Waves, Inc., offers manufacturers a percentage of the
revenue the encryption system generates. Their first market is lawyers,
"because lawyers spend $ 400 a month on information searches." Sprague's next
step is to compress the encrypto-metering circuits and the modem down into a
single $ 20 microchip that can be tucked into beepers, video recorders, phones,
radios, and anything else that dispenses information.  Ordinarily, this vision
might be dismissed as the pipe dream of a starry-eyed junior inventor, but
Peter Sprague is chairman and founder of National Semiconductor. He is sort of
a Henry Ford of silicon chips. A cypherpunk: not. If anyone knows how to
squeeze a revolutionary economy onto the head of a pin, it might be him. <p>

Digital Cash <p>

This anticipated information economy still lacks one vital component -- an
ingredient that, once again, is enabled by encryption, and a key element that,
once again, only long-haired crypto-rebels are experimenting with: electronic
cash. <p>

We already have electronic money. It flows daily in great invisible rivers
from bank vault to bank vault, from broker to broker, from country to country,
from your employer to your bank account. One institution alone, the Clearing
House Interbank Payment System, currently moves an average of one trillion
dollars (a million millions) each day via wire and satellite. <p>

But that river of numbers is institutional electronic money, as remote from
electronic cash as mainframes are from PCs. When pocket cash goes digital --
de-massified into data in the same transformation that institutional money
underwent -- we'll experience the deepest consequences of an information
economy. Just as computing machines did not reorganize society until
individuals plugged into them outside of institutions, the full effects of
electronic economy will have to wait until everyday pettycash (and check)
transactions of individuals go digital. <p>

We have a hint of digital cash in credit card and ATMs. Like most of my
generation, I get the little cash I use at an ATM, not having been inside a
bank in years. On average, I use less cash every month. Highoctane executives
fly around the country purchasing everything on the go -- meals, rooms, cabs,
supplies, presents -- carrying no more than $ 50 in their wallets.  Already,
the cashless society is real for some.  PAGE 31
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

Today in the US, credit-card purchases are used for one-tenth of all
consumer payments. Credit-card companies salivate, envisioning a near future
where people routinely use their cards for "virtually every kind of
transaction." Visa U.S.A. is experimenting with card-based electronic money
terminals (no slip to sign) at fast-food shops and grocery stores. Since 1975,
Visa has issued over 20 million debit cards that deduct money from one's bank
account. In essence, Visa moved ATMs off of bank walls and onto the front
counters of stores. <p>

The conventional view of cashless money thus touted by banks and most
futurists is not much more than a pervasive extension of the generic
credit-card system now operating. Alice has an account at National Trust Me
Bank. The bank issues her one of their handy-dandy smart cards. She goes to an
ATM and loads the wallet-size debit card with $ 300 cash, deducted from her
checking account.  She can spend her $ 300 from the card at any store, gas
station, ticket counter, or phone booth that has a Trust Me smart-card slot. <p>

What's wrong with this picture? Most folks would prefer this system over
passing around portraits of dead presidents. Or over indebtedness to Visa or
MasterCard. But this version of the cashless concept slights both user and
merchant; therefore it has slept on the drawing boards for years, and will
probably die there. <p>

Foremost among the debit (or credit) card's weaknesses is its nasty habit
of leaving every merchant Alice buys from -- newsstand to nursery -- with a
personalized history of her purchases. The record of a single store is not
worrisome. But each store's file of Alice's spending is indexed with her bank
account number or Social Security number. That makes it all too easy -- and
inevitable -- for her spending histories to be combined, store to store, into
an exact, extremely desirable marketing profile of her. Such a monetary dosier
holds valuable information (not to mention private data) about her. She has no
control over it, and derives no compensation from it. <p>

Second, the bank is obliged to hand out whiz-bang smart cards. Banks being
legendary cheapskates, you know who is going to pay for them, at bank rates.
Alice will also have to pay the bank for the transaction costs of using the
money card. <p>

Third, merchants pay the system a small percentage whenever a debit card is
used. This eats into their already-small profits and discourages vendors from
soliciting the card's use for small purchases. <p>

Fourth, Alice can only use her money at establishments equipped with slots
that accept Trust Me's proprietary technology.  This hardware quarantine has
been a prime factor in the non-happening of this future. It also eliminates
person-to-person payments (unless you want to carry a slot around, for others
to poke into). Furthermore, Alice can only refill her card account
(essentially, purchase money) at an official Trust Me ATM branch. This obstacle
could be surmounted by a cooperative network of banks using a universal slot
linked into an internet of all banks; a hint of such a network already exists.
    The alternative to debit-card cash is true digital cash. Digital cash has
none of the debit card's drawbacks.  PAGE 32
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

True digital cash is real money, with the nimbleness of electricity and the
privacy of cash. Payments are accountable, but unlinkable. The cash does not
demand proprietary hardware or software. Therefore, money can be received or
transferred from and to anywhere, including to and from other individuals. You
don't need to be a store or institution to get paid in "non-paper" money.
Anyone connected can collect. And any company with the right reputation can
"sell" electronic-money refills, so the costs are at market rates. Banks are
only peripherally involved. You use digital cash to order a pizza, pay for a
bridge toll, or reimburse a friend, as well as to pay the mortgage, if you
want. It is different from plain old electronic money in that it can be
anonymous and untraceable, except by the payer. It is fueled by encryption. <p>

The method, technically known as blinded digital signatures, is based on a
variant of public-key encryption.  Here's how it works at the consumer level.
You use a digicash card to pay Joe's Meat Market for a prime roast. The
merchant can verify (by examining the digital signature of the bank issuing the
money) that he has been paid with money that has not been paid with money that
has not been spent before. Yet he'll have no record of who paid him. After the
transaction, the bank has a verifiable account that you spent $ 7, and spent it
only once, and that Joe's Meat Market did indeed receive $ 7. But those two
sides of the transaction are not linked, and cannot be reconstructed, unless
you the payer enable them to be. It seems illogical at first that such blind,
but verifiable, transactions can occur, but the integrity of their
"disconnection" is pretty watertight. <p>

Digital cash can replace every use of pocket cash, except flipping a coin.
You have a complete record of all your payments, and to whom they were made. <p>

The privacy and agility of digital cash stems from a simple and clever
technology. When I ask a digicash-card entrepreneur if I can see one of his
smart cards, he says that he's sorry. He thought he had put one in his wallet,
but can't find it. It looks like a regular credit card, he says, showing me his
very small collection of them. It looks like...why, here it is! He slips out a
blank, very thin, flexible card. The plastic rectangle holds math money. In one
corner is a small gold square the dimensions of a thumbnail. This is a
computer.  The CPU, no larger than a soggy cornflake, contains a limited amount
of cash, say $ 500 or 100 transactions, whichever comes first. This one, made
by Cylink 2 , contains a coprocessor specifically designed to handle public-key
encryption mathematics. On the computer's gold square are six very minute
surface contacts, which connect with an online computer when the card is
inserted into a slot. <p>

Less-smart cards (they don't do encryption) are big in Europe and Japan,
where 61 million of them are already in use.  Japan is afloat in a primitive
type of electronic currency -- prepaid magnetic phone cards. The Japanese
national phone company, NTT, has so far sold 330 million (some 10 million per
month) of them. Forty percent of the French carry smart cards in their wallets
today to make phone calls. New York City recently introduced a cashless phone
card for a few of its 58,000 public phone booths.  New York is motivated not by
futurism, but by thieves. According to The New York Times, "Every three
minutes, a thief, a vandal, or some other telephone thug beaks into a coin box
or yanks a handset from a socket. That's more than 175,000 times a year," and
it costs the city $ 10 million annually for repairs. The disposable phone card
New York uses is not very smart, but it's adequate. It employs an infrared
optical memory, common in European phone cards, which is hard to counterfeit in
small quantities but cheap to manufacture in large numbers.  PAGE 33
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

In Denmark, smart cards substitute for the credit cards the Danes never
got.  So everyone who would tote a credit card in America, packs a smart debit
card in Denmark. Danish law demanded two significant restrictions: 1) that
there be no minimum purchase amount; 2) that there be no surcharge for the
card's use. The immediate effect was that the cards began to replace cash in
everyday use, even more than checks and credit cards have replaced cash in the
States. The popularity of these cards is their undoing, because unlike cheap,
decentralized phone cards, these cards rely on real-time interactions with
banks. They are overloading the Danish banking system, hogging phone lines as
the sale of each piece of candy is transmitted to the central bank, flooding
the system with transactions that cost more than they are worth. <p>

David Chaum, a Berkeley cryptographer now living in Holland, has a
solution.  Chaum, head of the cryptography group at the Center for Mathematics
and Computer Science in Amsterdam, has proposed a mathematical code for a
distributed, true digital-cash system. In his solution, everyone carries around
a refillable smart card that packs anonymous cash. This digicash seamlessly
intermingles with electronic cash from home, company, or government. And it
works offline, freeing the phone system. <p>

Chaum looks like a Berkeley stereo-type: grey beard, full mane of hair tied
back in a ponytail, tweed jacket, sandals. As a grad student, Chaum got
interested in the prospects and problems of electronic voting. For his thesis,
he worked on the idea of a digital signature that could not be faked, an
essential tool for fraudproof electronic elections. From there his interest
drifted to the similar problem in computer network communications: how can you
be sure a document is really from who it claims to be from? At the same time he
wondered: how can you keep certain information private and untraceable? Both
directions -- security and privacy -- led to cryptography and a Ph.D. in that
subject. <p>

Sometime in 1978, Chaum says, "I had this flash of inspiration that it was
possible to make a database of people so that someone could not link them all
together, yet you could prove everything about them was correct. At the time, I
was trying to convince myself that it was not possible, but I saw a loophole,
how you might do it, and I thought, gee ... But it wasn't until 1984 or '85
that I figured out how to actually do that." <p>

"Unconditional untraceability" is what Chaum calls his innovation. When
this code is integrated with the "practically unbreakable security" of a
standard public-key encryption code, the combined encryption scheme can provide
anonymous electronic money, among other things. Chaum's encrypted cash (to
date, none of the other systems anywhere are encrypted) offers several
important practical improvements in a card-based electronic currency. <p>

First, it offers the bonafide privacy of material cash. In the past, if you
bought a subversive pamphlet from a merchant for a dollar, he had a dollar that
was definitely a dollar and could be paid to anyone else; but he had no record
of who gave him that dollar, or any way to provably reconstruct who gave it to
him. In Chaum's digital cash, the merchant likewise gets a digital dollar
transferred from your card (or from an online account), and the bank can prove
that indeed he definitely has one dollar there and no more and no less, but no
one (except you if you want) can prove where that dollar came from.  PAGE 34
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

One minor caveat: the smart-card versions of cash so far implemented are,
alas, as vulnerable and valuable as cash if lost or stolen. However, encryting
them with a PIN password would make them substantially more secure, though also
slightly more hassle to use. Chaum predicts that users of digicash will use
short (four-digit) PINs (or none at all) for minor transactions, and longer
passwords for major ones. Speculating a bit, Chaum says, "To protect herself
from a robber who might force her to give up her passwords at gunpoint, Alice
could use a 'duress code' that would cause the card to appear to operate
normally, while hiding its more valuable assets." <p>

Second, Chaum's card-based system works offline. It does not require
instant verification via phone lines as credit cards do, so the costs are
minimal and perfect for the numerous small-time cash transactions people want
them for -- parking meters, restaurant meals, bus rides, phone calls,
groceries. Transaction records are ganged together and zapped once a day, say,
to the central accountant computer. <p>

During this day's delay, it would theoretically be possible to cheat. <p>

Electronic money systems dealing in larger amounts, running online in
almost real time, have a smaller window of opportunity for cheating -- the
instant between sending and receiving -- but the minute opportunity is still
there.  While it is not theoretically possible to break the privacy aspect of
digital cash (who paid who), if you were desperate enough for small cash, you
could break the security aspect -- has this money been spent? -- with
supercomputers.  By breaking the RSA public-key code, you could use the
compromised key to spend money more than once. That is, until the information
was submitted to the bank and they caught you. For, in a delicious quirk,
Chaum's digital cash is untraceable unless you try to cheat by spending money
more than once. When that happens, the extra bit of information the twice-spent
money now carries is enough to trace the payer. So electronic money is a
anonymous as cash, except for cheaters! <p>

Because of its cheaper costs, the Danish government is making plans to
switch from the Dencard to the Dencoin, an offline system suited to small
change. The computational overhead needed to run a system like this is
nano-small. Each encrypted transaction on a smart card consumes only 64 bytes.
(The previous sentence contains 67 bytes.) A household's yearly financial
record of all income and expenditures would easily fit on one high-density
floppy disk.  Chaum calculates that the existing mainframe computers in banks
would have more than adequate computational horsepower to handle digital cash.
The encryption safeguards of an offline system would reduce much of the
transactional computation that occurs on line over phone lines (for ATMs and
credit-card checks), enabling the same banking computers to cover the increase
in electronic cash. Even if we assume that Chaum guessed wrong about the
computational demands of a scaled-up system, and that he is off by a factor of
ten, computer speed is accelerating so fast that this defers the feasibility of
using existing bank power by only a few years. <p>

In variations on Chaum's basic design, people may also have computer
appliances at home, loaded with digital-cash software, which allow them to pay
other individuals, and get paid, over phone lines. This would be e-money on the
networks. Attached to your email message to your daughter is an electronic $
100 bill. She may use that cash to purchase, via email, an airplane ticket
home. The airline sends the cash to one of their vendors, the flight's meal
caterer. In <p>

PAGE 35
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

Chaum's system nobody has any trace of the money's path. Email and digital cash
are a match made in heaven. Digital cash could fail in real life, but it is
almost certain to flourish in computer networking society. <p>

I asked Chaum what banks think of digital cash. His company(3) has visited
or been visited by most of the big players; do they say, Gee, this threatens
our business? Or do they say, Hmm, this strengthens us, makes us more
efficient?  Chaum: "Well, it ranges. I find the corporate planners in $ 1,000
suits and private dining halls are more interested in it than the lower-level
systems guys, because the planners' job is to look to the future. Banks don't
go about building stuff themselves. They have their systems guys buy stuff from
vendors.  My company is the first vendor of electronic money. I have a very
extensive portfolio of patents on electronic money, in the US, Europe and
elsewhere." Some of Chaum's crypto-anarcho friends give him a hard time about
taking out patents on this work. Chaum tells me in defense, "It turns out that
I was in the field very early, so I wiped out all the basic problems. So most
of the new work now in encrypted electronic money are extensions and
applications of the basic work I did. The thing is, banks don't want to invest
into something that is unprotected. Patents are very helpful in making
electronic money happen." <p>

Chaum is an idealist. He sees security and privacy as a trade-off. His
larger agenda is providing tools for privacy in a networked world, so that
privacy can be balanced with security. In the economics of networks, costs are
disproportionately dependent on the number of other users. To get the Fax
Effect going, you need a critical mass of early adopters. Once beyond the
threshold, the event is unstoppable because it is self-reinforcing. Electronic
cash shows all the signs of having a lower critical-mass threshold than other
implementations of data privacy. Chaum is betting that an electronic cash
system inside an email network, or a card-based electronic cash for a local
public transportation network, has the lowest critical mass of all. <p>

The most eager current customers for digital cash are European city
officials. They see card-based digital cash as the next step beyond the
magnetic fast-passes now issued regularly by most cities' bus and subway
departments. One card is filled with as much bus money as you want. But there
are added advantages: the same card could fit into parking meters, when you did
drive, or be used on trains for longer-distance travel. <p>

Urban planners love the idea of automatic tolls charging vehicles for
downtown entry or crossing a bridge, without having the car stop or slow down.
Bar-code lasers can identify moving cars on the road, and drivers will accept
purchasing vouchers.  What's holding up a finer-grain toll system is the
Orwellian fear that "THEY will have a record of my car's travels." Despite that
fear, automatic tolls that record the cars' identity are already operating in
Oklahoma, Louisiana, and Texas. Three states in the busy Northeast have agreed
to install one compatible system, starting with experimental setups on two <p>

Manhattan/New Jersey bridges. In this system, a tiny card-size radio taped to
the car windshield transmits signals to the toll gate, which deducts the toll
from your account at the gate (not from the card). Similar equipment running on
the Texas turnpike system is 99.99 percent reliable. These proven toll
mechanisms could easily be modified to Chaum's untraceable encrypted payments,
and true electronic cash, if people wanted. <p>

In this way, the same cash card that pays for public transportation can
also be used to cover fees for private transportation. Chaum relates that in
his PAGE 36
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

experience with European cities, the Fax Effect -- the more people online = the
more incentive to join -- takes hold, quickly drawing other uses. Officials
from the phone company get wind of what's up and make it known that they would
like to use the card to rid themselves of a nasty plague called "coins" that
bog public phones down. Newspaper vendors call to inquire if they can use the
card ... soon the economics of networks begin to take over. <p>

Ubiquitous digital cash dovetails well with massive electronic networks.
It's a pretty sound bet that Internet - today's version of the Net - will be
the first place that e-money will infiltrate deeply. Money is another type of
information, a compact type of control. As the net expands, money expands.
Wherever information goes, money is sure to follow. By its decentralized,
distributed nature, encrypted e-money has the same potential for transforming
economic structure as personal computers did for overhauling management and
communication structure. Most importantly, the privacy/security innovations
needed for e-money are instrumental in developing the next level of adaptive
complexity in an information-based society. I'd go so far as to say that truly
digital money -- or, more accurately, the economic mechanics needed for truly
digital cash -- will rewire the nature of our economy, communications, and
knowledge. <p>

The consequential effects of electronic money are already underway. Four we
can expect are: <p>

* Increased velocity. When money is disembodied -- removed from any
material basis at all -- it speeds up. It travels farther, faster. Circulating
money faster has an effect similar to circulating more money. When satellites
went up, enabling near-the-speed-of-light round-the-clock world stock trade,
they expanded the amount of global money by 5 percent. Digital cash used on a
large scale will further increase money's velocity. <p>

* Continuity. Money that is composed of gold, precious materials, or paper
comes in fixed units that are paid at fixed times. The ATM spits out $ 20
bills; that's it. You pay the phone company once a month, even though you use
the phone every day.  This is batch-mode money. Electronic money is
continuous-flow. It allows recurring expenses to be paid, in Alvin Toffler's
phrase, by "bleeding electronically from one's bank account in tiny droplets,
on a minute-by-minute basis." Your e-money account pays for each phone call as
soon as you hang up, or -- how about this -- as you are talking. Payment
coincides with use.  Together with its higher velocity, continuous electronic
money can approach near instantaneity. This puts a crimp on banks, which derive
a lot of their current profit on the "float" -- which instantaneity erases. <p>

* Unlimited fungibility. Finally, really plastic money. Once completely
disembodied, digitized money escapes from a single transmission form and
merrily migrates to whatever medium is handiest. Separate billing fades away.
Accounts can be inter-leaved with the object or service itself. The bill for a
video comes incorporated into the video. Invoices reside alongside of bar
codes, and can be paid with the zap of a laser. Anything that can hold an
electronic charge can hold a fiscal charge. Foreign currencies become a matter
of changing a symbol. Money is as malleable as digitized information. This
makes it all the easier to monetize exchanges and interactions that were never
part of an economy before. It opens the floodgates of commerce onto the net.
PAGE 37
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

* Accessibility. Until now, sophisticated manipulations of money have been
the private domain of professional financial institutions -- a financial
priesthood. But just as a million Macs broke the monopoly of the high priests
guarding access to main-frame computers, so e-money will break the monopoly of
financial Brahmins. Imagine if you could charge (and get) interest on any money
due you by dragging an icon over that electronic invoice. Imagine if you could
factor in the "interest due" icon, and give it variable interest, ballooning as
it aged. Or maybe you would charge interest by the minute if you sent a payment
in early. Or program your personal computer to differentially pay bills
depending on the prime rate -- programmed bill-trading for amateurs. Or perhaps
you would engineer your computer to play with exchange rates, paying bills in
whatever currency is least valuable at the time. All manner of clever financial
instruments will surface once the masses can drink from the same river of
electronic money as the pros. To the list of things to hack, we may now add
finance. We are headed toward programmed capitalism. <p>

* Privatization. The ease with which e-money is caught, flung, and shaped
makes it ideal for private currencies. The 214 billion yen tied up by Japan's
NTT's phone cards is one limited type of private currency. The law of the net
is: he who owns a computer not only owns a printing press, but also a mint,
when that computer is linked to e-money. Para-currencies can pop up anywhere
there is trust (and fail there, too). <p>

Historically, most modern barter networks rapidly slide into exchanges of
real currency; one could expect the same in electronic barter clubs, but the
blinding efficiency of an e-money system may not tend that way. The $ 350
billion tax question is whether para-currency networks would ever rise above
unofficial status. <p>

* The minting and issuing of currency has been one of the few remaining
functions of government that the private sector has not encroached upon.
E-money will lower this formidable barrier. By doing so it will provide a
powerful tool to private governance systems, such as might be established by
renegade ethnic groups, or the "edge cities" proliferating near the world's
megacities. The use of institutional electronic money transfers to launder
money on a global scale is already out of anyone's control. <p>

The Yin of the Network's Yang <p>

The nature of e-money -- invisible, lightning-quick, cheap, globally
penetrating -- is likely to produce indelible underground economies, a worry
way beyond mere laundering of drug money. In the net-world, where a global
economy is rooted in distributed knowledge and decentralized control, e-money
is not an option but a necessity. Para-currencies will flourish as the Grand
Net flourishes. The electronic matrix is destined to be an outback of hardy
underwire economies. The net is so amicable to electronic cash that once
established interstitially in the net's links, e-money is probably
ineradicable. <p>

In fact, the legality of anonymous digital cash is in limbo from the start.
There are now strict limits to the size of transactions US citizens can make
with physical cash; try depositing $ 10,000 in greenbacks in a bank. At what
amount will the government limit anonymous digital cash? The drift of all
governments is to demand fuller and fuller disclosures of financial
transactions (to make sure they get their cut of tax) and to halt unlawful
transactions (as in the War on Drugs). The prospect of allowing untraceable
commerce to bloom PAGE 38
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

on a federally subsidized network would probably have the US government
seriously worried, if they were thinking about it. But they aren't. A cashless
society smells like stale science fiction, and the phrase reminds every
bureaucrat drowning in paper of the unfulfilled predictions of a paperless
society. Eric Hughes, maintainer of the cypherpunks' mailing list, says, <p>

* "The Really Big Question is, how large can the flow of money on the nets
get before the government requires reporting of every small transaction?
Because if the flows can get large enough, past some threshold, then there
might be enough aggregate money to provide an economic incentive for a
transnational service to issue money, and it wouldn't matter what one
government does." <p>

Hughes envisions multiple outlets for electronic money springing up all
over the global net. The vendors would act like traveler's-check companies.
They would issue e-money for, say, a 1 percent surcharge. You could then spend
Internet Express checks wherever anyone accepted them. But somewhere on the
global net, underwire economies would dawn, perhaps sponsored by the
governments of struggling developing countries. Like the Swiss banks of old,
these digital <p>

banks would offer unreported transactions. Paying in online Nigerian nairas
from a house in Connecticut would be no more difficult than using US dollars.
"The interesting market experiment," Hughes says, "is to see what the
difference in the charge for anonymous money is, once the market equalizes. I
bet it'll be on the order of 1 to 3 percent higher, with an upper limit of
about 10 percent.  That amount will be the first real measure of what financial
privacy is worth.  It might also be the case that anonymous money will be the
only kind of money." <p>

Usable electronic money may be the most important outcome of a sudden
grassroots takeover of the formerly esoteric and forbidden field of codes and
ciphers. Everyday e-money is one novel use for encryption that never would have
occurred to the military. There are certainly many potential uses of
 encryption that the cypherpunks' own ideological leanings blind them to, and
that will have to wait until encryption technology enters the mainstream -- as
it certainly will. <p>

To date, encryption has birthed the following: digital signatures, blind
credentials (you have a diploma that says: Yes you have a Ph.D., but no one can
link that diploma with your other diploma from traffic school), anonymous
email, electronic money.  These species of disconnection thrive as networks
thrive. <p>

Encryption wins because it is the necessary counterforce to the net's
runaway tendency to connect everything. It is a prime technology of
disconnection. The net says, "Just connect." The cipher says, "Disconnect."
Encipherment is the complementary technology to the technology of cheap copying
and linking. Without some force of disconnection, the world would freeze up in
an overloaded tangle of unprivate connections and unfiltered information. <p>

I'm listening to the cypherpunks, not because I think that anarchy is a
solution to anything, but because it seems to me that encryption technology
civilizes the gridlocking avalanche of knowledge and data that networked
systems generate. A cipher is the yin for the network's yang, a tiny hidden
force that is able to tame the explosive interconnections born of
decentralized, distributed systems. <p>

GRAPHIC: Photograph PAGE 39
                       Whole Earth Review, June 22, 1993 <p>

IAC-NUMBER: IAC 13805354 <p>

IAC-CLASS: Magazine <p>

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH <p>

LOAD-DATE-MDC: January 13, 1994 <p>

</DOC>