
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B12-81</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000631-B020-70</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.111.html 130.91.195.242 19970122064238 text/html 12648
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 06:42:40 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 12476
Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:32:34 GMT
</DOCHDR>
FIRP report comments -- forward to your lists if you wish <p>

Date: Tue, 15 Feb 94 17:12:30 -0500
From: Stephen D Crocker &lt;crocker@tis.com&gt; <p>

These are the meat of the comments I've supplied in response to the
draft FIRP report.

     Response to the Draft Report of the Federal Internetworking
              Requirements Panel (FIRP), 14 January 1994 <p>

Part 1: Strategic Comments <p>

Stephen D. Crocker
          Vice President, Trusted Information Systems, Inc.
                     IETF Security Area Director <p>

15 February 1994 <p>

INTRODUCTION <p>

"The Federal Internetworking Requirements Panel (FIRP) was established
by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to
reassess federal requirements for open systems networks and to
recommend policy on the [U.S.] Government's use of networking
standards."  [Preface, para 1.] <p>

The FIRP report describes the need for the U.S. Federal Government to
embrace not only the OSI protocol suite but also the ubiquitous TCP/IP
Protocol Suite.  In fact, Internet Standards, which include the TCP/IP
Protocol Suite, are in very wide use in the Government, throughout the
U.S. and throughout the world.  Some OSI products and systems exist,
and it may be impossible to switch completely to TCP/IP-based systems.
Nonetheless, the report says, it is time to acknowledge the widespread
use of the Internet Standards and give formal sanction to their use in
the Government. <p>

This is indeed a welcome change, and it should help the Government
take better advantage of modern data networking. <p>

This memo is the first of two responses to the report.  In this memo,
some issues are raised with respect to the recommendations in the FIRP
report, and suggestions are made for avoiding problems in the future. <p>

In the other memo, comments are given with respect to specific
sections of the report. <p>

STRATEGIC COMMENTS <p>

This panel was convened in response to a divergence between the
strategy the U.S. Federal Government had been following for several
years and the direction of the marketplace.  As the report makes
clear, the divergence had become so great that the policy no longer
reflected attainable objectives.  The accommodation of the Internet
Standards brings policy into line with widespread practice and removes
obstacles for rational management decisions in the future. <p>

In this light, it's worth examining the recommendations to ascertain
if they are sufficient to avoid similar problems in the future.  As
with any large organization, the U.S. Federal Government pursues
multiple policy objectives and has ingrained organizational
imperatives.  Recommendations that respond only to the current
marketplace without also anticipating the future or without including
the flexibility to follow the lead of the marketplace may lead to the
convening of a similar panel in the not too distant future. <p>

The FIRP report makes five recommendations: <p>

1. The role of oversight and integration across federal agency
  internetworking activities should be strengthened within the Office of
  Management and Budget. <p>

2. The roles and responsibilities for fostering standards and
  assessing technological change should be refocused and strengthened by
  the Department of Commerce. <p>

3. The roles and responsibilities for infrastructure development and
  operations to support all internetworking services from advanced
  research and development to leading edge to core/commodity services
  should be clearly defined and formally assigned through the
  Information Infrastructure Task Force. <p>

4. The roles and responsibilities of affinity groups should be
  defined, including how they are created and coordinated by the
  Government Information Technology Services working group. <p>

5. In accordance with OMB Circular A-119, Revised October 1992,
  voluntary standards should be adopted and used by Federal agencies,
  and international standards should be considered in the interests of
  promoting trade.  The current GOSIP policy should be modified by the
  Department of Commerce to reflect the wider range of international
  voluntary standards for internetworking. <p>

Recommendation 1 asks that OMB's role be strengthened.  OMB has the
charter to review the roles, responsibilities and performances of the
various agencies which provide, develop or guide the U.S. Government's
internetworking activities. <p>

This is an important role.  The OMB should develop guidelines for
measuring the performance of the assigned agencies and the attainment
of the overall objectives.  Although there is usually a preference to
avoid duplication of activities, some degree of competition,
exploration of alternative strategies and comparison of results is
desirable because it tends to produce more cost effective products and
services that are better matched to the needs of the users.  Wherever
feasible, the OMB should also foster multiple approaches and/or
participation by multiple agencies in order to provide for maximum
feedback within the system. <p>

Recommendation 2 suggests the Department of Commerce be tasked with
new responsibility for "fostering standards." <p>

Presumably the context of this recommendation is with respect to
internal standards within the U.S.  Government.  The general arena for
developing Internet Standards is the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF) which operates in conjunction with the Internet Architecture
Board (IAB) under the auspices of the Internet Society.  The Internet
Society, along with NSF, ARPA, DOE and NASA, provide considerable
financial support to the standards activities.  This process enjoys
wide spread support form the industrial, academic and government
communities, and as a result, the standards developed in this arena
reflect the needs of marketplace and are usually adopted widely and
quickly. <p>

Even if this recommendation is understood to be limited to refer to
internal use of the U.S. Government, the recommendation is flawed.
"Department of Commerce" here certainly includes NIST, but is likely
to include other parts of the Department.  While NIST is indeed the
federal agency tasked with promoting and developing standards, NIST
and the rest of the Department have at least two difficulties to
overcome. <p>

First, NIST has been the lead agency with respect to GOSIP.  NIST
personnel are deeply knowledgeable about the OSI suite and less
familiar with the TCP/IP Protocol Suite.  NIST is not now in a
position to provide leadership in this area, although it does have the
technical strength to follow, assist and participate in the ongoing
standards activities.  One challenge for NIST in the next few years
will be to strengthen its staff and adjust its direction to move
toward a stronger involvement in the Internet Standards activities.  A
significant part of this challenge is working in a standards arena in
which the U.S. Government does not have de jure authority or veto
power. <p>

Second, the Department of Commerce is heavily committed to a
particular strategy with respect to cryptography that is currently in
conflict with the forces in the marketplace.  NIST is the lead agency
involved in the promulgation of the Digital Signature Standard (DSS)
and the "Clipper" escrowed-key encryption system.  Both of these
initiatives are meeting very strong resistance from industry and
academia.  The RSA algorithm is the de facto standard for signatures
and key exchange, and some form of DES and/or some proprietary
algorithms, e.g. RC2 and RC4, are likely to be the de facto standards
for bulk encryption. <p>

The U.S. Government's orientation toward cryptography comes from the
specific concerns of the intelligence and law enforcement agencies.
While not denying the principle that the intelligence and law
enforcement agencies have legitimate concerns, it is far from clear
that the approach being taken by the Department in support of these
concerns will be successful.  In fact, it is entirely possible these
initiatives will not succeed in the marketplace.  If so, the result
will be the existence of dual standards in which the Government
algorithms will be used only under duress, both the Government and the
general population will bear unnecessary costs dealing with dual
standards, the introduction of strong security controls will be
retarded, and the intelligence and law enforcement agencies will not
succeed in preventing the use of strong encryption, except in so far
as they succeed in retarding the use of encryption altogether.  On
February 4, 1994, the Department announced it had made substantial
progress in its review of policies governing cryptography.  Its
announced that export controls on DES and similar cryptography will
remain in place, that the Department will continue to promulgate the
Digital Signature Standard despite uncertainties about the patent and
licenses, and it will adopt the escrowed encryption system (Clipper)
as a Government standard.  Nothing in the public record supports these
decisions, and it was made clear that these decisions are driven by
the views of the law enforcement and intelligence agencies. <p>

The purpose of citing these controversies concerning cryptography
policy here is to explicate a consequence relevant to the FIRP report.
The Commerce Department, and in particular NIST, have a conflict of
interest.  Like a lawyer with two clients with intertangled interests,
the Department is trying to serve two constituencies.  One
constituency is the federal government as a whole, and in that role,
it must do the best job it can of interpreting the market forces and
adopting federal standards that are consistent with the marketplace. <p>

The Department's other constituency is the particular needs of the law
enforcement and intelligence agencies.  Those agencies desire to
influence and change the direction of the marketplace.  In service of
this role, NIST is adopting federal standards that reflect the
direction the law enforcement and intelligence agencies want the
market to go. <p>

The only way for the Department to be successful is if the law
enforcement and intelligence agencies prevail and the marketplace
adopts the standards the Government is promulgating.  Perhaps this
will happen, and if so, the Government's gamble will pay off.
However, if the marketplace continues to adopt RSA as the preferred
public key algorithm, if DES and other non-escrowed algorithms are
used for symmetric key encryption, and if products with encryption are
become prevalent in non-U.S. markets, not only will the stated goals
of the law enforcement and intelligence communities be lost, the rest
of the federal government and indeed the rest of the country will have
paid the price in struggling with dual standards. <p>

Like a stubborn child with a tensed jaw, the U.S. Government seems
bent on pressing forward with these initiatives.  So be it.  But in
handing out accolades because NIST is now willing to accommodate the
protocols that have been commonplace for many years, it's fair to note
that NIST and the rest of the Department are engaged in an exercise
which promises to bring a repeat of the same divergence, confusion and
waste of resources which the FIRP report documents. <p>

Recommendation 3 suggests that each role and responsibility should be
tasked to some specific agency.  Apparently this is aimed at reducing
duplication.  While useful in principle, this approach is fragile.  If
the assigned agencies are incompetent or inefficient, everyone
suffers.  The report does suggest that some assignments may be
decentralized.  Decentralization should be emphasized.  Wherever
possible, multiple approaches and multiple agencies should be
encouraged.  Competition and comparison are enormously useful forces.
As noted above with respect to recommendation 1, the OMB should
encourage as much decentralization as possible and should oversee the
agencies establishing a means of measuring the results. <p>

Recommendations 4 and 5 are oriented toward implementation of the
first three recommendations and raise fewer strategic concerns except
that recommendation 5 implicitly acknowledges that the role of the
U.S. Government in the standards process shift from one of controlling
the process to one of participating in the process.  As noted above
with respect to recommendation 2, this shift poses an institutional
challenge for the Government in general and NIST in particular. <p>

</DOC>