
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B07-76</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA095-001027-B020-335</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.cdt.org:80/policy/freespeech/burr72495.html 205.177.10.31 19970215015429 text/html 30046
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 01:53:07 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>Testimony of Bill Burrington, Assist. General Counsel, America 
Online</title>
<body>
<pre>


                             BEFORE
                 THE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
                     UNITED STATES SENATE


                      WRITTEN TESTIMONY OF 
                     WILLIAM W. BURRINGTON 
                   ASSISTANT GENERAL COUNSEL
               AND DIRECTOR OF GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS
                      AMERICA ONLINE, INC.
                       VIENNA, VIRGINIA
 
                              AND

            CHAIRMAN OF THE ONLINE POLICY COMMITTEE
                 INTERACTIVE SERVICES ASSOCIATION
                     SILVER SPRING, MARYLAND


         HEARINGS ON S. 892 AND INDECENCY ON THE INTERNET 

July 24, 1995

Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I am William W. Burrington, 
Chairman of the Online Policy Committee of the Interactive Services 
Association and Assistant General Counsel and Director of Government 
Affairs for America Online, Inc. in Vienna, Virginia. I appear before 
you today on behalf of the Interactive Services Association ("ISA") and 
its Online Policy Committee.1

As the oldest non-profit North American association serving businesses 
that deliver telecommunications-based interactive services to consumers, 
the ISA has been responsive to concerns about the social and political 
impact of this new interactive medium that millions of Americans use 
every day. ISA's 300-plus members (see Appendix A) represent the full 
spectrum of industries now active in delivering personal interactive 
services. ISA's membership includes companies from the advertising, 
broadcasting, cable, computer, financial services, marketing, 
publishing, telephone, and travel industries. 

We understand that the purpose of these hearings is to discuss the 
responsibility of interactive online services, including those that 
provide access to the Internet, for the act of transmitting material to 
minors that is deemed to be indecent. Our industry is concerned about 
children's access via online services to materials that their parents 
believe to be inappropriate. We also want to ensure that Congress 
creates an effective response that will not devastate the myriad 
benefits to our country that will result from active participation in 
the National Information Infrastructure. We want to work with Congress 
to protect children, empower parents to screen out unwanted material, 
and preserve constitutional guarantees of free speech, free press, and 
individual privacy.

In its zeal to "clean up" the content of a small portion of electronic 
communications, S.892 would target for liability online service 
providers while ignoring content providers and subscribers who create, 
control, and upload indecent material onto networks. For example, 
although access by minors to Playboy magazine may be restricted in some 
states, it is not restricted under federal law. This legislation, 
however, creates the anomalous result of punishing online service 
providers for permitting the electronic distribution of Playboy to 
minors although federal law does not punish the publisher. This is not 
to say that the publisher should be punished; we simply cannot agree 
that the constitution would permit computer distribution to be 
criminalized when the publishing of the same material is not.

What's more, the online providers would be liable under S.892 for 
indecent communication regardless of any measures they may take to limit 
access or to screen content providers on their system. Statutory 
defenses for providers who make good faith efforts to screen and block 
indecent materials to minors would provide an industry incentive to 
develop effective blocking and screening devices. The lack of such 
defenses in S.892 would serve as a disincentive for investing in such 
efforts.

ISA is also concerned about the criminalization of indecent speech, 
given that this speech is protected by the Constitution and can be 
restricted only in a few narrowly defined situations. The Supreme 
Court's Sable decision mandates that regulations on indecent speech must 
be narrowly drawn to protect minors without unnecessary interference 
with the First Amendment. The regulation proposed by S.892 is not the 
least restrictive alternative. It prohibits any "communication that 
contains indecent material" as well as indecent material itself directed 
at minors. This type of regulation is not likely to pass constitutional 
muster. 

Rather than criminalizing the mere transmission of certain materials, 
Congress should support and encourage the entrepreneurial spirit of the 
interactive services industry to build parental empowerment tools and 
encourage the industry to make such solutions widely available to 
consumers. Even without any legislation, the market is already acting to 
address the concerns of parents, educators, and others who are 
interested in controlling the flow of information accessible via 
computer. Just last week, companies such as America Online Inc., Webster 
Network Strategies, SurfWatch Software, and Netscape announced new 
products and services that allow users to screen from their online 
systems content they find offensive.

In my testimony today, I would like to address several issues: 

1. Constitutional guarantees of free speech and press should be 
   cautiously guarded. We urge Congress to consider the least 
   restrictive alternatives in achieving the goal of protecting minors 
   from indecent materials;

2. The online service provider industry should be encouraged to provide  
   voluntary editorial control over its services and to continue its 
   research and development of parental empowerment technology tools. 
   This industry should not be cast in the role of national censor, 
   determining which information may be fit for children, but 
   nonetheless subject to criminal liability if it guesses incorrectly 
   in any given instance; and 

3. The ISA agrees with the Department of Justice and the American Family 
   Association that existing laws suffice to punish the use of computer 
   networks for obscenity and child pornography. We believe that current 
   law negates the need for new legislation, either federally or at the 
   state level.

Before I address these points, I would like to provide an overview of 
the online service industry.

INDUSTRY OVERVIEW

Online service providers offer interactive services to millions of 
subscribers across the United States. In fact, there are presently over 
8 million subscribers to computer-based online services. "Interactive 
services" are easy-to-use, telecommunications-based services designed 
for information exchange, communications, transactions, and 
entertainment. These services can be accessed by a personal computer, 
telephone, screen telephone, or television. Online service providers may 
simply transmit the communications created by others, or they may 
additionally offer content such as "bulletin boards" or "home pages." 

Interactive services are unlike any previous communications media. When 
an individual listens to the radio or watches television, the Supreme 
Court has recognized that the individual may be "surprised" by an 
indecent message; that is, by the time the viewer has seen the message, 
it is too late to avoid it or look away. This is the rationale behind 
some time, place, and manner restrictions on speech communication 
through such media. In the online medium, it is much less likely that a 
user will be surprised by indecent or obscene material. The online 
medium generally requires that a user take affirmative steps, such as 
using electronic mail or accessing a particular service through the 
click of an icon or typing in a particular address, prior to receiving 
communications. Although random online assault by indecent images or 
messages is possible, it is certainly not the norm.

I really can't talk about interactive services without mentioning the 
Internet. The Internet is a world-wide phenomenon available in over 90 
countries, connecting some 5 million different computer systems, and 
accessed by an estimated 10 - 30 million people. These connected 
computer systems are operated by universities and other nonprofits, 
research institutions, governments, businesses, and individuals. There 
is no central governing body or policy governing worldwide user 
behavior. Further, some obscene and indecent material originates in 
countries other than the United States, and is therefore beyond the 
practical reach of American law.

The vast majority of all communication available over the Internet and 
other online services, however, is educational, informative, or 
entertaining. The ability to access and successfully use a variety of 
information will increase the productivity and enjoyment of American 
life. For example, American students have vast educational opportunities 
literally at their fingertips via the Internet. The majority of 
educational databases currently originate in the United States. Should 
Internet access be cut off because of the threat of criminal liability, 
students across the globe will have access to information that is 
withheld from American students. Not only would this handicap our future 
by denying educational opportunities to students, but it would handicap 
America's international competitiveness as well by decreasing access to 
productivity-enhancing services.

Finally, interactive television services will bring video and other 
programming into households on demand. Currently, online services enable 
millions of people to communicate with each other and to access news, 
weather, sports, and financial information through the touch of a 
keyboard. These services enable personal communication across America as 
well as around the globe.

Interactive services empower their users. Since the beginning of 
consumer online services in the early 80s, one key fact has emerged and 
is often overlooked. Tools provided by interactive services can act as 
an extension of the person, compensating for differing abilities related 
to, for example, age or physical health. Electronic grocery shopping can 
be both a convenience to many, and a lifeline to a homebound individual 
who is seeking to stay independent. Communities, too, will experience 
increasing social and political empowerment through electronic 
communication, forums, information sharing, and collaborative planning. 
Perhaps more than any other medium that has been used by American 
citizens, interactive services support the fundamental principles of our 
democracy. And as services evolve to multimedia presentation, so, too, 
will applications tailored to those of us with hearing, speech, sight, 
mobility or other challenges. This empowerment of the public offers a 
unique opportunity for individuals, parents, and families to make 
conscious choices about the types of material they wish to receive via 
their computer terminals.

With this basic overview in mind, I will now address the first of the 
issues:

I. S. 892 IS NOT THE LEAST RESTRICTIVE ALTERNATIVE FOR LIMITING ACCESS 
   TO CERTAIN SPEECH. 

Let me clarify that S.892 applies to online service providers only to 
the extent that they are transmitting material. That is, for the 
purposes of this bill, it is not relevant whether the online provider 
was the source of the indecent communication to a minor or if it merely 
transmitted an indecent communication that originated elsewhere. S.892 
is simply unworkable because it is not narrowly focused on the bad 
actors; online service providers cannot police and be aware of the 
specific content of each communication, and yet they are penalized for 
transmitting certain communications. Conspicuously absent from S.892 is 
any mention of the creator of the offending materials.

Online services are entitled to at least the same level of First 
Amendment protection accorded to other news disseminators, such as 
newspapers. See Miami Herald Co. v. Tornillo, 418 U.S. 241 (1974). In 
fact, online service providers are likely entitled to even greater 
protection because of the virtually infinite capacity of the medium to 
accommodate all speakers and points of view. It is precisely for this 
reason that legislators must use an abundance of caution prior to 
regulating and criminalizing online speech activities. As the Supreme 
Court cautioned in its landmark decision New York Times v. Sullivan, 376 
U.S. 254, 279 (1964), such a limitation on speech "dampens the vigor and 
limits the variety of public debate... [and] is inconsistent with the 
First Amendment."

As the U.S. Supreme Court has acknowledged, expression that is indecent 
but not obscene is protected by the First Amendment. Consequently, to 
regulate indecent expression in a constitutional manner, "[i]t is not 
enough to show that the Government's ends are compelling; the means must 
be carefully tailored to achieve those ends." Sable Communications of 
California, Inc. v. F.C.C., 492 U.S. 115, 126 (1989). S. 892 is not a 
narrowly tailored effort to serve the compelling interest of preventing 
minors from being exposed to indecent communications on computer 
networks. Furthermore, it fails to encourage industry to develop further 
measures that will improve user control over online services. 

S. 892 would depart from the federal criminal law's general rule that 
the originators of obscene material are liable for its distribution, not 
the entities who unwittingly carry out the distribution, such as a 
telephone network, a trucking company, or a courier service. See, e.g., 
18U.S.C. $$ 1462, 1465. Without a federal law that prohibits a person 
from using a computer to transmit an indecent communication to a minor, 
S.892 proposes to impose criminal liability on access providers who 
permit others to use their computer network facilities to transmit 
indecent communications to minors. That is, the bill proposes to punish 
access providers for permitting others to do something that federal law 
does not prohibit. It is, in the words of the Supreme Court in Sable, 
"another case of 'burn[ing] the house to roast the pig.'" The new S.892 
approach is not likely to survive constitutional scrutiny. 

Moreover, the so-called dial-a-porn regulations that evolved after 
nearly a decade of constitutional attack contained "safe harbor" 
defenses for industry. See Dial Information Services v. Thornburgh, 
938F.2d 1535 (2d Cir. 1991). S. 892 provides no such defenses, again 
rendering it constitutionally vulnerable on the grounds that there are 
other approaches less restrictive but just as effective in achieving its 
goal of denying access by minors to indecent communications on computer 
networks. 

Finally, in the context of private communications such as electronic 
mail, S.892 places online providers in an impossible position: it holds 
them criminally responsible for indecent communications to minors while 
the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 ("ECPA") forbids them 
from monitoring electronic mail. See 18 U.S.C. $$ 2701, 2702. The bill 
would treat online providers differently than other communications 
carriers: even with regard to communications that rises to the level of 
criminal activity, neither the Postal Service, Federal Express, nor Bell 
Atlantic is expected to know the contents of hand-written mail or of 
telephone conversations between persons conspiring in a criminal 
enterprise, nor are they held liable for failing to prevent any harm 
that may result.

II. VOLUNTARY EDITORIAL CONTROL AND USER EMPOWERMENT TOOLS ARE THE MOST 
    EFFECTIVE CONSTITUTIONAL APPROACH TO PREVENTING ACCESS BY CHILDREN  
    TO INDECENT MATERIALS. 

As a matter of public policy, Congress should rely on the 
entrepreneurial spirit of the interactive services industry to build 
parental empowerment tools and encourage the industry to work together 
to ensure that such solutions are widely available. Technological relief 
is currently available and more is under way. Prosecutors appear to have 
the prosecutorial tools they need, too. The Justice Department certainly 
has not asked for new criminal laws to combat smut on the Internet. 

While industry has demonstrated its willingness to serve an editorial 
function, a current obstacle to wide implementation of measures to block 
or filter out offensive materials is the threat of liability for any 
offending material that may fail to get screened. Two months ago in New 
York, for example, Prodigy was found to be a "publisher" of libelous 
statements made by a subscriber on one of its online bulletin boards "in 
large measure" because of measures that Prodigy took to be "a family 
oriented computer network." Prodigy was liable even though it was (and 
is) unable to control the content of user communications and was unaware 
of the particular offending statement. Congress should not now legislate 
another disincentive -- criminal liability -- rather, it should continue 
to let the market respond to the demand for editing functions and 
screening tools.

In addition, the online service provider industry has developed a broad 
array of technological screening devices, with the promise of more to 
come. It is sad and ironic that S.892 intends to reward industry for its 
efforts with criminal liability. The current industry initiatives 
include the following:

First, providers can control the audience. At America Online, for 
example, we require a credit card or checking account to open an online 
account, which, like the dial-a-porn regulation's credit card 
requirement, presumes that the new subscriber is an adult. 

Second, providers can help the subscribers control the audience. For 
example, at Prodigy, the registered head of each household, using a 
credit card for verification, must activate an Internet connection for 
each family member. America Online within two months will expand its 
existing parental control offerings with a new feature that will enable 
parents to block access to all but the "Kids Only" area of the service 
with content targeted and programmed specifically for kids. This will 
allow parents to have access to all America Online features, but limit 
their children's access to the Kids Only area.

Third, providers can exercise control over the topics of the chat lines 
and conferences that they sponsor and, consistent with federal law, 
monitor many of these activities. On these chat lines and conferences, 
online providers enforce rules that require that messages transmitted 
for posting be relevant to the subject of these activities. 

Fourth, while online operators cannot legally monitor e-mail, they act 
on complaints brought to their attention by subscribers who receive 
offensive material by e-mail. All that a subscriber needs to do is 
forward the e-mail to the provider; at that point, the provider can take 
appropriate action based on the message. If, for example, the sender is 
a subscriber of CompuServe, CompuServe can act against the sender if he 
or she has breached the operating rules. If the e-mail message indicates 
possible unlawful activity, the online provider will forward the 
material to law enforcement officials for investigation. 

Fifth, particularly with regard to the Internet, many providers are 
incorporating powerful new blocking and filtering technology to empower 
parents to make choices -- consistent with their own particular values 
-- about the material that their children can access. Currently at 
America Online, for example, parents are able to block their children's 
access to Internet newsgroups while permitting them other access to the 
Internet. In addition, America Online last week announced a relationship 
with SurfWatch Software, Inc. that will provide its adult subscribers 
with easy tools to block unwanted inappropriate material on the World 
Wide Web. SurfWatch, which also is available to families who do not 
subscribe to commercial online services, incorporates a roster of sites 
known to carry sexually explicit content that is automatically updated 
each month. 

NET NANNY and CYBERsitter are among other affordable products for 
controlling children's access to the Internet that are currently 
available. Another software product, WEBTrack School Edition (SE), which 
its developer recently announced would be provided at no charge to 
primary and secondary schools, gives school administrators the 
capability to restrict access to five categories of Internet sites (sex, 
drugs, hate speech, criminal skills, and online gambling) while allowing 
full access to the rest of the Internet's resources.

Among the more innovative proposals on the drawing boards is "KidCode," 
currently being developed by Internet standards developers. KidCode 
would establish voluntary labeling systems that identify Internet 
information that is inappropriate for children. These labels could then 
be used in new ways to empower parents and educators to select the 
Internet content that children could access.

The attention that content on computer networks has recently received 
continues to spur industry to invest in technologies that will further 
empower parents to protect their children from access to inappropriate 
materials.

But all of the empowerment tools in the world will not work unless we 
educate parents about their existence and use. Consequently, in 
conjunction with the efforts to deploy new empowerment tools, the ISA 
will launch an online and off-line Parental Empowerment Program next 
month. Even preceding this effort, which may include information kits 
that parents can request via an 800-number service and World Wide Web 
Home Page, the ISA and seven major online operators teamed with the 
National Center for Missing Children to publish a pamphlet entitled 
"Child Safety on the Information Highway." (See Appendix B). The 
pamphlet is available at no charge by calling 1-800-THE-LOST and over 
all the major online services. This pamphlet advises parents in setting 
rules and guidelines for their children's online activities, and helps 
parents understand the risks involved on the information superhighway. 
Our goal is to educate parents better about the tools available to keep 
indecent and other inappropriate materials out of the hands of computer-
literate minors.

The goal of empowering and educating parents is to allow them to make 
their own choices and to customize those choices depending upon the age 
of their children and their own family values, not those of some 
monolithic government or special interest group. Finally, we realize 
that parents may not be as computer savvy as their own kids. For that 
reason, we have made all of our parental empowerment tools very simple 
and easy to implement with the click of a mouse. Our goal -- to make 
these technology features easier for parents to use than setting the 
clock on their VCR.

Technology is one solution; parental awareness is another. These will 
work far better than cold words in a criminal statute to protect 
America's children from inappropriate material on the Internet. Indeed, 
the new technological tools will permit parents who wish to do so to 
block out a whole lot more than just material that online providers, if 
they permit its transmission, will go to jail for. 

III. NEW LEGISLATION IS UNNECESSARY TO MEET CONGRESSIONAL GOALS. 

Law enforcement agencies and prominent pro-family groups agree that 
current laws already authorize prosecutions of constitutionally 
unprotected speech on computer networks.2 Illegal conduct over computer 
networks has been punished under existing federal laws concerning 
trafficking in obscenity, child pornography, harassment, illegal 
solicitation or luring of minors, and threatening to injure someone. The 
desire to create additional legislation in this area is somewhat curious 
in light of the ability to prosecute wrongdoers under current laws and 
of the prosecutions that have taken place. 

To the extent that particular gaps may appear in the future, or if any 
obstacles arise to prosecution of those who make obscenity or indecency 
available to minors, Congress should examine whether there is a need for 
additional training or additional resources for enforcement of the 
current laws. No less an authority than the Department of Justice, the 
agency responsible for investigating and prosecuting these crimes, has 
requested not precipitous action but rather an in-depth analysis of the 
complex legal and policy issues surrounding the goals of protecting 
children while respecting First Amendment and privacy rights of computer 
users.3 

It is also critical that Congress preserve a uniform national standard 
governing the behavior of online service providers. During the past 
year, at least five states -- Connecticut, Georgia, New Jersey, 
Oklahoma, and Virginia -- have enacted laws aimed at obscenity or 
harassment on computer networks. These statutes may create standards 
that are inconsistent with the goal of incenting industry to create 
technological tools to block and screen particular communications. 
Again, industry should be encouraged to continue to work with 
communities to develop tools that allow the appropriate levels of access 
to and control of online services.

Multiple regulations would be more than burdensome for online service 
providers; they may be impossible to satisfy for technical and economic 
reasons. Moreover, state requirements could conflict with one another, 
creating a situation in which compliance in one state could create 
culpability in another. Finally, because service providers are unable to 
accommodate varying standards, they would be forced to meet the content 
and activity standards of the most restrictive state. In this way, one 
state legislature, rather than the federal government, would control the 
content of our country's contribution to the global information 
superhighway.

Permitting every state to adopt its own standard would lead to 
uncertainty for business and drive away market participants, thereby 
severely undermining our nation's ability to develop and make use of the 
National Information Infrastructure to promote national economic, 
educational, and social goals.

CONCLUSION

Perhaps more than any other medium that has ever been used by Americans, 
online services support the fundamentals of our participatory democracy. 
Our government's role should be to facilitate -- not inhibit -- the 
development of the National and Global Information Infrastructure. And 
that is what government has done to date. The Congress has begun making 
congressional information available online; the White House and some 
federal agencies have set up sites on the World Wide Web; and federal 
agencies have established advisory committees to make recommendations on 
policies for the NII. 

We believe that for every child empowered by the Internet's benefits 
there should be a parent empowered to protect his or her children from 
the risks that exist on the Internet, as elsewhere in life. We believe 
that empowering technology, and education not cumbersome regulation, is 
the most effective and least intrusive means for serving the public 
interest in protecting minors.

Any changes in federal law should seek to remove any disincentives for 
creating "child safe" areas rather than to impose criminal liability 
upon online providers for permitting others to engage in conduct not 
prohibited by federal law or S. 892 -- the transmission by others of 
indecent materials to minors.

footnootes:
--------------------------------------------------------------------
1 ISA's Online Operators Policy Committee is comprised of: America 
Online, Inc.; Apple e-World; CompuServe; Delphi Internet Services Corp.; 
GEnie; Interchange Network Company; MCI; Microsoft Network; Prodigy 
Services Company; and Ziff Davis Interactive. 

2 For example, in his May 6, 1995 letter to Rep. Thomas Bliley, the 
American Family Association's Patrick Trueman, the Section Chief during 
Bush and Reagan Administrations of the Child Exploitation and Obscenity 
Section of the Justice Department's states: 

"[T]he federal criminal code currently prohibits distribution of both 
child pornography and obscenity by computer."
In the Justice Department's May 3, 1995 letter to Sen. Patrick Leahy, 
Kent Markus, the Acting Assistant Attorney General for Legislative 
Affairs, states:

"[W]e have applied current law to this emerging problem. . . . The 
Department's Criminal Division has, indeed, successfully prosecuted 
violations of federal child pornography and obscenity laws which were 
perpetrated with computer technology."

3 In the Justice Department's May 3, 1995 letter to Sen. Patrick Leahy, 
Kent Markus, the Acting Assistant Attorney General for Legislative 
Affairs, states:

"We recommend that a comprehensive review be undertaken of current laws 
and law enforcement resources for prosecuting online obscenity and child 
pornography, and the technical means available to enable parents and 
users to control the commercial and noncommercial communications they 
receive over interactive telecommunications systems." 
In the Justice Department's June 13, 1995 letter to Sen. James Exon, 
Acting Assistant Attorney General Markus states: "Again, we are 
committed to protecting children while also respecting First Amendment 
and privacy rights. While substantial progress has been made in your 
revised proposal, it still raises a number of complex legal and policy 
issues that call for in-depth analysis prior to congressional action."

<pre>
<hr size = 2>
Return to the <a href="724list.html">index of testimony from the 7/24 
hearing</a><br>
Return to the <a href="http://www.cdt.org/cda.html">CDT Home Page</a>

</body>
</html>

</DOC>