
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B11-293</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000618-B043-299</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.020.full.html 130.91.195.242 19970122053517 text/html 63616
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:35:03 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 63444
Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:02 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<TITLE>Why civil liberties pose no threat to civil rights.</TITLE>
<H1>Why civil liberties pose no threat to civil rights.</H1>

Let Them Talk
<BR> By Henry Louis Gates Jr. <p>

<PRE>
Words That Wound:
Critical Race Theory, Assaultive Speech
and the First Amendment
by Mari J. Matsuda, Charles R. Lawrence III, Richard Delgado and
Kimberl≈ Williams Crenshaw
(Westview Press, 160 pp., $46.50, $15.95 paper)
</PRE>
 <p>

I. <p>

"As a thumbnail summary of the last two or three decades of speech
issues in the Supreme Court," the great First Amendment scholar Harry
Kalven Jr. wrote in 1965 in The Negro and the First Amendment, "we may
come to see the Negro as winning back for us the freedoms the
Communists seemed to have lost for us." Surveying the legal scene in
the heyday of the civil rights era, Kalven was confident that civil
rights and civil liberties were marching in unison; that their mutual
expansion represented, for a nation in a time of tumult, an
intertwined destiny. He might have been surprised had he lived to
witness the shifting nature of their relations. Today the partnership
named in the title of his classic book seems hopelessly in disrepair.
Civil liberties are regarded by many as a chief obstacle to civil
rights. To be sure, blacks are still on the front lines of First
Amendment jurisprudence--but this time we soldier on the other side.
The byword among many black activists and black intellectuals is no
longer the political imperative to protect free speech; it is the
moral imperative to suppress "hate speech." <p>

Like such phrases as "pro-choice" and
"pro-life," the phrase "hate speech" is ideology in spansule form. It
is the term-of-art of a movement, most active on college campuses and
in liberal municipalities, that has caused many civil rights activists
to rethink their allegiance to the First Amendment, the very amendment
that licensed the protests, the rallies, the organization and the
agitation that galvanized the nation in a recent, bygone era.
Addressing the concerns of a very different time, the hate speech
movement has enlisted the energies of some of our most engaged and
interesting legal scholars. The result has been the proliferation of
campus speech codes as well as municipal statutes enhancing penalties
for bias crimes. <p>

No less important, however, is the opportunity that this movement has
provided, for those outside it, to clarify and to rethink the meaning
of their commitment to the freedom of expression. It is an
opportunity, I must say, that we have miserably bungled. Content with
soundbites and one-liners,
our deliberations on the subject have had all the heft of a talk-show
monologue. Free speech? You get what you pay for. <p>

The irony that lurks behind this debate, of course, is that the First
Amendment may be the central article of faith in the civil religion of
America, if America has a civic religion. "It's a free country," we
say, and shrug; and what we usually mean is that you can say what you
please. "Sticks and stones can break my bones," we are taught to chant
as children, "but words can never hurt me." As Catharine MacKinnon
writes with some asperity in Only Words, her new book, Americans <p>

are taught this view by about the fourth grade, and continue to absorb
it through osmosis from everything around them for the rest of their
lives... to the point that those who embrace it think it is their own
personal faith, their own original view, and trot it out like
something learned from their own personal lives every time a problem
is denominated one of "speech," whether it really fits or not. <p>

The strongest argument for regulating hate speech is the unreflective
stupidity of most of the arguments for the other side. I do not refer
to the debate as it has proceeded in the law reviews, where you find a
quality of caution, clarity and tentativeness that has made few
inroads into the larger public discourse; the law professors who offer
the best analysis of public discourse exert very little influence on
it. And this leaves us with a familiar stalemate. On the one side are
those who speak of "hate speech," a phrase that alludes to an argument
instead of making it; and to insist on probing further is to admit
that you "just don't get it." On the other side are those who invoke
the First Amendment like a mantra and seem immediately to fall into a
trance, so oblivious are they to further discussion and evidence. A
small number of anecdotes, about racism on campus or about p.c.
inquisitions on campus, are endlessly recycled, and a University of
Pennsylvania undergraduate named Eden Jacobowitz, of "water buffalo"
fame, becomes a Dreyfus de nos jours. <p>

There is also a practical reason to worry about the impoverishment of
the national discourse on free speech. If we keep losing the
arguments, then we may slowly lose the liberties that they were meant
to defend. We may come to think that the bad arguments are the only
arguments, and when someone finally disabuses us of them, we may
switch sides without ever considering the better arguments for staying
put. That is why, for all the pleasures of demonology, the burgeoning
literature urging the regulation of racist speech has a serious claim
on our attention. <p>

Now Westview Press has conveniently  collected the three most widely
cited and influential papers making the case for the regulation of
racist speech. (The collection also includes a provocative essay by
Kimberle Williams Crenshaw about the conflicting allegiances posed by
race and gender.) Gathered together for the first time, these essays--
which originally appeared in law reviews over the past several years,
and were circulated more widely through the samizdat of the
photocopier--complement each other surprisingly well. Their proximity
to each other casts light on their strengths and their weaknesses. <p>

The authors of these proposals are "minority" law professors who teach
at mainstream institutions--Mari J. Matsuda and Charles R. Lawrence
III at Georgetown and Richard Delgado at the University of Colorado.
They write vigorous and accessible prose. They are, one can fairly
say, the legal eagles of the crusade against racist hate speech. But
they are also, as the subtitle of their collection suggests, the
principal architects of critical race theory, which is one of the most
widely discussed trends in the contemporary legal academy; and their
jointly written introduction to the volume serves as the clearest
manifesto that the movement has yet received. <p>

Critical race theory, we learn, owes its "social origins" to a student
boycott of a Harvard Law School course in 1981. The course was called
"Race, Racism and American Law," and the university failed to accede
to student demands that it be taught by a person of color. Organizing
an informal alternative course, students invited lawyers and law
professors of color to lecture weekly on the topic. Crenshaw was one
of the student organizers of the alternative course, Matsuda was one
of its participants and Delgado and Lawrence were among its guest
lecturers. And thus was formed the nucleus of "a small but growing
group of scholars committed to finding new ways to think about and act
in pursuit of racial justice." <p>

The intellectual ancestry of the movement is more complicated, but its
two main progenitors are the brand of feminist theory associated with
MacKinnon and the radical skepticism toward traditional black-letter
pieties associated with critical legal studies. Almost invariably, the
literature arguing for hate speech regulation cites MacKinnon as an
authority and a model, and takes on one or more of the traditional
legal distinctions (such as the distinction between "private" and
"public") whose dismantling is a staple of critical legal studies. So
it is no surprise that conservative pundits denounce these theorists
of hate speech as faddish foes of freedom. In fact, one could more
accurately describe their approach as neotraditional. And those
conservatives who dream of turning the cultural clock back to the '50s
should realize that the First Amendment law of those years is
precisely what these supposedly faddish scholars wish to revive. <p>

For the conventional lay defense of free speech absolutism, and its
concomitant attack on those who would curtail free speech, suffers
from a bad case of historical amnesia. Just as Samuel Johnson thought
he could refute Bishop Berkeley just by kicking a stone, the armchair
absolutists often think that they can win the debate just by adducing
the authority of the First Amendment itself. The invocation is
generally folded together with a vague sort of historical argument.
The First Amendment, we are told, has stood us in good stead through
more than two centuries; and our greatness as a society may depend on
it. The framers of the Constitution knew what they were doing, and
(this is directed to those inclined to bog down in interpretative
quibbles) in the end the First Amendment means what it says. <p>

The only flaw of this uplifting and  well-rehearsed argument is that
it is false. Indeed, the notion that the First Amendment has been a
historical mainstay of American liberty is an exemplary instance of
invented tradition. To begin with, the First Amendment was not
conceived as a protection of the free speech of citizens until 1931.
Before then, the Court took the amendment at its word: "Congress shall
make no law...." Congress could not; but states and municipalities
could do what they liked. And so it is no surprise that once the
Supreme Court recognized freedom of expression as a right held by
citizens, the interpretation of its scope still remained quite narrow.
This changed after World War II, when the Warren Court gradually
ushered in a more generous vision of civil liberties. So the expansive
ethic that we call the First Amendment, the eternal verity that people
either celebrate or bemoan, is really only a few decades old. <p>

But the hate speech movement is not content with rehearsing the
weaknesses in the absolutist position. It has also aligned itself with
earlier traditions of jurisprudence--here the movement's atavism is
most obvious--by showing that the sort of speech it wishes to restrict
falls into two expressive categories that the Supreme Court has
previously held (and, the advocates of restrictions argue, correctly
held) to be undeserving of First Amendment protection. The categories
are those of "fighting words" and group defamation, as exemplified by
cases decided in 1942 and 1952. <p>

The doctrine of "fighting words" was promulgated by the Supreme Court
in Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire (1942), in which the Court held that
the Constitution did not protect "insulting or `fighting' words--those
that by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an
immediate breach of the peace." "Such utterances are no essential part
of any exposition of ideas," Justice Murphy wrote for the majority,
"and are of such slight social value as a step to truth that any
benefit that may be derived from them is clearly outweighed by the
social interest in order and morality." Those who would regulate hate
speech argue that racist abuse is a variety of, or "functionally
equivalent to," the sort of language that the Chaplinsky decision
declared to be unprotected; indeed, the carefully drafted speech code
adopted by Stanford University in 1990 explicitly extends only to
"fighting words" or symbols, thus wearing its claim to
constitutionality on its face. If Chaplinsky can shoulder the legal
and ethical burdens placed upon it, the regulationists have a powerful
weapon on their side. <p>

Can it? Probably not. To begin with, it is an open question whether
Chaplinsky remains, as they say, "good law." For the Supreme Court, in
the fifty years since Chaplinsky, has never once affirmed a conviction
for uttering either "fighting words" or words that "by their very
utterance inflict injury." Indeed, in part because of this functional
desuetude, in part because of the supposed male bias of the "breach of
the peace" prong (men being more likely than women to throw a punch),
the editors of the Harvard Law Review recently issued a call for the
doctrine's explicit interment. So much for the doctrine's judicial
value. <p>

The young scholars at the Harvard Law Review also note, with others,
that statutes prohibiting "fighting words" have had discriminatory
effects. An apparently not atypical conviction, upheld by the
Louisiana state court, was occasioned by the following exchange
between a white police officer and the black mother of a young
suspect. He: "Get your black ass in the goddamned car." She: "You
goddamn mother <p>

ing police--I am going to [the superintendent of police] about this."
No prize for guessing who was convicted for "fighting words." As the
legal scholar Kenneth Karst reports, "Statutes proscribing abusive
words are applied to members of racial and political minorities more
frequently than can be wholly explained by any special proclivity of
those people to speak abusively." So much for the doctrine's political
value. <p>

Even if we finally reject the appeal to Chaplinsky, the hate speech
movement can still link itself to constitutional precedent through the
alternative model of group defamation. Indeed,  the defamation model
is more central, more weighty, in these arguments. And note that these
are alternatives, not just different ways of describing the same
thing. The "fighting words" or "assaultive speech" paradigm compares
racist expression to physical assault: at its simplest, it
characterizes an act of aggression between two individuals, victim and
victimizer. The defamation paradigm, by contrast,  compares racist
speech to libel, which is an assault on dignity or reputation. The
harm is essentially social; to be defamed is to be defamed in the eyes
of other people. <p>

Here the guiding precedent is Justice Frankfurter's majority opinion
in the case of Beauharnais v. Illinois (1952), in which the Court
upheld a conviction under an Illinois group libel ordinance. The
ordinance was clumsily written, but it essentially prohibited public
expression that "portrays depravity, criminality, unchastity or lack
of virtue in a class of citizens of any race, color, creed or
religion," thereby exposing them to "contempt, derision or obloquy."
In Frankfurter's opinion: "If an utterance directed at an individual
may be the object of criminal sanctions we cannot deny to a state
power to punish the same utterance directed at a defined group," at
least as long as the restriction related to the peace and well-being
of the state. <p>

Beauharnais v. Illinois has since fallen into judicial disrepute,
having been reversed in its particulars by subsequent cases like the
celebrated Sullivan v. New York Times. Indeed, more widely cited than
Justice Frankfurter's opinion is Justice Black's dissent: "If there be
minority groups who hail this holding as their victory, they might
consider the possible relevancy of this ancient remark: `Another such
victory and I am undone.'" And yet Frankfurter's claim for the
congruence of individual libel and group libel is not implausible, and
many critical race theorists argue for its resurrection. Thus
MacKinnon urges "the rather obvious reality that groups are made up of
individuals." That is why "libel of groups multiplies rather than
avoids the very same damage through reputation which the law of
individual libel recognizes when done one at a time, as well as
inflicting some of its own." <p>

What is wrong with the basic claim, endorsed by judges and scholars
across the ideological spectrum, that group libel is just individual
libel multiplied? Begin with the assumption that individual libel
involves the publication of information about someone that is both
damaging and false. Charles Lawrence III inadvertently directs us to
the source of the problem. The racial epithet, he writes, "is invoked
as an assault, not as a statement of fact that may be proven true or
false." But that suggests that the evaluative judgments characteristic
of racial invective do not lend themselves to factual verification--
and this is where the comparison with individual libel breaks down.
The same problem emerges when MacKinnon identifies pornography as an
instance of group defamation whose message is (roughly) that it would
be nice if women were available for sexual exploitation. A proposition
of that form may be right or wrong, but it cannot be true or false.
You cannot libel someone by saying, "I despise you"; but that is
precisely the message common to most racial epithets. "Nigger," used
in the vocative, is not usefully treated as group libel for the same
reason that it is not usefully treated as individual libel. <p>

II. <p>

Critical race theory is strongest not when it seeks to establish a
bridgehead with constitutional precedent, but when it frontally
contests what has recently emerged as a central aspect of Supreme
Court First Amendment doctrine: the principle of content and viewpoint
neutrality. That principle is meant to serve as a guide to how speech
can permissibly be regulated, ensuring basic fairness by preventing
the law from favoring one partisan interest over another. So, for
example, a law forbidding the discussion of race would violate the
principle of content-neutrality, which is held to be a bad thing; a
law forbidding the advocacy of black supremacy would violate the
principle of viewpoint-neutrality, which is held to be a worse thing.
When the Minnesota Supreme Court affirmed the content-sensitive hate
speech ordinance at issue in rav v. St. Paul, it cited Mari J.
Matsuda's work in reaching its conclusions. When Justice Scalia
reversed and invalidated the ordinance on the grounds of viewpoint
discrimination, he was implicitly writing against Matsuda's argument.
These are not mere conflicts of academic vision; these are arguments
with judicial consequences. <p>

Matsuda's rejection of what she calls the "neutrality trap" is, to my
mind, the most powerful element of her argument. Rather than trying to
fashion neutral laws to further our social objectives, why not put our
cards on the table and acknowledge what we know? As an example of
where the neutrality trap leads, Matsuda cites the anti-mask statutes
that many states passed "in a barely disguised effort to limit Ku Klux
Klan activities": <p>

These statutes purportedly cover the wearing of masks in general, with
no specific mention of the intent to control the Klan. Neutral reasons
such as the need to prevent pickpockets from moving unidentified
through crowds or the need to unmask burglars or bank robbers are
proffered for such statutes. The result of forgetting--or pretending
to forget--the real reason for anti-mask legislation is farcical.
Masks are used in protest against terrorist regimes for reasons both
of symbolism and personal safety. Iranian students wearing masks and
opposing human rights violations by the Shah of Iran, for example,
were prosecuted under a California anti-mask statute. I call here for
an end of such unknowing. We know why state legislatures--those
quirkily populist institutions--have passed anti-mask statutes. It is
more honest, and less cynically manipulative of legal doctrine to
legislate openly against the worst forms of racist speech, allowing
ourselves to know what we know. <p>

What makes Matsuda's position particularly attractive is that she
offers a pragmatic, pro-civil liberties argument for content-
specificity: <p>

The alternative to recognizing racist speech as qualitatively
different because of its content is to continue to stretch existing
First Amendment exceptions, such as the "fighting words" doctrine and
the "content/conduct" distinction. This stretching ultimately weakens
the First Amendment fabric, creating neutral holes that remove
protection for many forms of speech. Setting aside the worst forms of
racist speech for special treatment is a non-neutral, value-laden
approach that will better preserve free speech. <p>

At the very least, this approach would promise a quick solution to the
abuse of "fighting words" ordinances. Consider Matsuda's own approach
to legal sanctions for racist speech. By way of distinguishing "the
worst, paradigm example of racist hate messages from other forms of
racist and non-racist speech," she offers three identifying
characteristics: <p>

<OL>
<LI> The message is of racial inferiority.
<LI> The message is directed against a historically oppressed group.
<LI> The message is persecutory, hateful and degrading.
</OL>
The third element, she says, is "related to the `fighting words'
idea"; and the first "is the primary identifier of racist speech"; but
it is the second element that "attempts to further define racism by
recognizing the connection of racism to power and subordination." <p>

The second element is the one that most radically departs from the
current requirement that law be neutral as to content and viewpoint.
But it would seem to forestall some of the abuses to which earlier
speech ordinances have been put, simply by requiring the victim of the
penalized speech to be a member of a "historically oppressed group."
Surely there is something refreshingly straightforward about the call
for "an end to unknowing." <p>

Is Matsuda on to something? Not quite. Ironically enough, what trips
up the content-specific approach is that it can never be content-
specific enough. Take a second look at Matsuda's three identifying
characteristics of paradigm hate speech. First, recall, that the
message is of racial inferiority. Now, Matsuda is clear that she wants
her definition to encompass, inter alia, anti-Semitic and anti-Asian
prejudice; but anti-Semitism (as the philosopher Laurence Thomas, who
is black and Jewish, observes) traditionally imputes to its object not
inferiority, but iniquity. Moreover, anti-Asian prejudice often more
closely resembles anti-Semitic prejudice than it does anti-black
prejudice. Surely anti-Asian prejudice that depicts Asians as
menacingly superior, and therefore as a threat to "us," is just as
likely to arouse the sort of violence that notoriously claimed the
life of Vincent Chin ten years ago in Detroit. <p>

More obviously, the test of membership in a "historically oppressed"
group is either too narrow (just blacks) or too broad (just about
everybody). Are poor Appalachians, a group I knew well from growing up
in a West Virginia mill town, "historically oppressed" or "dominant
group members"? Once we adopt the "historically oppressed" proviso, I
suspect, it is a matter of time before a group of black women in
Chicago are arraigned for calling a policeman a "dumb Polak." Evidence
that Poles are a historically oppressed group in Chicago will be in
plentiful supply; the policeman's grandmother will offer poignant
firsthand testimony to that. <p>

III. <p>

The critique of neutrality would affect not simply how we draft our
ordinances, but also how we conduct our litigation. One quickly moves
from asking whether our statutes can or should be neutral to asking
whether the adjudication of these statutes can or should be neutral.
Indeed, many legal pragmatists, mainstream scholars and critical race
theorists converge in their affirmation of the balancing approach
toward the First Amendment and their corresponding skepticism toward
what could be called the "Skokie school" of jurisprudence. When the
American Civil Liberties Union defended the right of neo-Nazis to
march in Skokie, a predominantly Jewish suburb of Chicago where a
number of Holocaust survivors lived, they wished to protect and to
fortify the constitutional right at issue. Indeed, they may have
reasoned, if a civil liberty can be tested and upheld in so odious an
exercise of it, then the precedent will strengthen it for all the less
obnoxious cases where it may be disputed in the future. Hard cases
harden laws. <p>

The strategy of the Skokie school relies on a number of
presuppositions that critical legal theorists and others regard as
doubtful. Most importantly, it is premised on the neutral operation of
principle in judicial decisionmaking. But what if judges really
decided matters in an unprincipled and political way, and invoked
principles only by way of window dressing? In cases close-run enough
to require the Supreme Court to decide them, precedent and principle
are elastic enough, or complex enough, that justices can often decide
either way without brazenly contradicting themselves. And even if the
justices want to make principled decisions, it may turn out that the
facts of the case--in the real-world cases that come before them--are
too various and complicated ever to be overdetermined by the rule of
precedent, stare decisis. In either event, it could turn out that
defending neo-Nazis was just defending neo-Nazis. <p>

Moreover, it may be that the sort of formal liberties vouchsafed by
this process are not the sort of liberties that we need most. Perhaps
we have been overly impressed by the frisson of defending bad people
for good causes, when the good consequences are at best conjectural
and the bad ones real and immediate. Perhaps, these critics conclude,
it is time to give up the pursuit of abstract principles and instead
defend victims against victimizers, achieving your results in the
here-and-now, not in the sweet hereafter. <p>

There is something to this position, but it is, like the position it
is meant to rebuff, overstated. Nadine Strossen of the aclu can show,
for example, that the organization's winning First Amendment defense
of the racist Father Terminiello in 1949 bore Fourteenth Amendment
fruit when the aclu was able to use the landmark Terminiello decision
to defend the free speech rights of civil rights protesters in the
'60s and '70s. Granted, this may not constitute proof, which is an
elusive thing in historical argument, but such cases do provide good
prima facie reason to think that the Skokie school has pragmatic
justification, not just blind faith, on its side. <p>

Another problem with the abandonment of principled adjudication is
what it leaves in its wake: the case-by-case balancing of interests.
My point is not that "normal" First Amendment jurisprudence can
completely eschew balancing, but there is a difference between
employing it in background or in extremis and employing it as the
first and only approach. An unfettered regime of balancing admits too
much to judicial inspection. What we miss when we dwell on the
rarefied workings of high court decisionmaking is the way in which
laws exert their effects lower down the legal food chain. It's been
pointed out that when police arrest somebody for loitering or
disorderly conduct, the experience of arrest--being hauled off to the
station and fingerprinted before being released--often is the
punishment. And "fighting words" ordinances have lent themselves to
similar abuse. Anthony D'Amato, a law professor at Northwestern, makes
a crucial and often overlooked point when he argues: "In some areas of
law we do not want judges to decide cases at all--not justly or any
other way. In these areas, the mere possibility of judicial
decisionmaking exerts a chilling effect that can undermine what we
want the law to achieve." <p>

But what if that chilling effect is precisely what the law is designed
for? After all, one person's chill is another person's civility. It is
clear, in any event, that all manner of punitive speech regulations
are meant to have effects far beyond the classic triad of deterrence,
reform and retribution. <p>

IV. <p>

The main appeal of speech codes usually turns out to be expressive or
symbolic rather than consequential. That is, their advocates do not
depend on the claim that a speech-code statute will spare certain
groups some foreseeable amount of psychic trauma. They say, rather,
that such a statute expresses a university's opposition to hate speech
and bigotry; and more positively, that it symbolizes a commitment to
tolerance, to the creation of an educational environment in which
mutual colloquy and comity are preserved. <p>

In this spirit Matsuda writes that "a legal response to racist speech
is a statement that victims of racism are valued members of our
polity," and that "in a society that expresses its moral judgments
through the law," the "absence of laws against racist speech is
telling." In this same spirit Delgado suggests that a tort action for
racist speech would have the effect of "communicating to the
perpetrator and to society that such abuse will not be tolerated
either by its victims or by the courts" (italics mine). And also in
this spirit Thomas Grey, the Stanford law professor who helped draft
the campus speech regulations there, counsels that "authorities make
the most effective statement when they are honestly concerned to do
something beyond making a statement," thus "putting their money where
their mouth is." The punitive function of speech codes is thus
enlisted to expressive means, as a means of bolstering the credibility
of the anti-racist statement. <p>

Still, once we have admitted that the regulation of racist speech is
partly or wholly a symbolic act, we must register the force of the
other symbolic considerations that may come into play. Thus, even if
you think that the notion of free speech contains logical
inconsistencies, you need to register the symbolic force of its
further abridgement. And it is this level of scrutiny that may tip the
balance in the other direction. The controversy over flag-burning is a
good illustration of the two-edged nature of symbolic arguments.
Safeguarding the flag may symbolize something nice for some of us, but
safeguarding our freedom to burn the flag symbolizes something nicer
for others of us. <p>

Note, too, that the expressivist position suffers from an
uncomfortable contradiction. A university administration that merely
condemns hate speech, without mobilizing punitive sanctions, is held
to have done little, to have offered "mere words." And yet this
skepticism about the power of "mere words" comports oddly with the
attempt to regulate "mere words" that, since they are spoken by those
not in a position of authority, would seem to have even less symbolic
force. Why is it "mere words" when a university only condemns racist
speech, but not "mere words" that the student utters in the first
place? Whose words are "only words"? Why are racist words deeds, but
anti-racist words just lip service? <p>

And is the verbal situation really as asymmetrical as it first
appears? Surely the rebuke "racist" also has the power to wound. One
of the cases that arose under the University of Michigan speech code
involved a group discussion at the beginning of a dentistry class, in
which the teacher, a black woman, sought to "identify concerns of
students." A student reported that he had heard, from his roommate,
who was a minority, that minority students had a hard time in the
class and were not treated fairly. In response, the outraged teacher
lodged a complaint against the student for having accused her (as she
perceived it) of racism. For this black woman, at least, even an
indirect accusation of racism apparently had the brunt of racial
stigmatization. <p>

One other paradox fissures the hate speech movement. Because these
scholars wish to show that substantial restrictions on racist speech
are consistent with the Constitution, they must make the case that
racist speech is sui generis among offensive or injurious utterances;
otherwise the domain of unprotected speech would mushroom beyond the
point of constitutional and political plausibility. "Words That
Wound," the title of Delgado's pioneering essay, designates a category
that includes racist speech but is scarcely exhausted by it. Nor could
we maintain that racist insults, which tend to be generic, are
necessarily more wounding than an insult tailor-made to hurt someone:
being jeered at for your acne or your obesity may be far more hurtful
than being jeered at for your race or your religion. <p>

Alert to this consideration, scholars like Matsuda, Lawrence and
Delgado argue that racist speech is peculiarly deserving of
curtailment precisely because it participates in (and is at least
partly constitutive of) the larger structures of racism that are
"hegemonic" in our society. "Black folks know that no racial incident
is `isolated' in the United States," writes Lawrence: <p>

That is what makes the incidents so horrible, so scary. It is the
knowledge that they are not the isolated unpopular speech of a
dissident few that makes them so frightening. These incidents are
manifestations of a ubiquitous and deeply ingrained cultural belief
system, an American way of life.
To this consideration Matsuda annexes the further argument that what
distinguishes racist speech from other forms of unpopular speech is
"the universal acceptance of the wrongness of the doctrine of racial
supremacy." Unlike Marxist speech, say, racist speech is "universally
condemned." <p>

At first blush, this is a surprising claim. After all, if racist
speech really were universally rejected, ordinances against it would
be an exercise in antiquarianism. And yet there is something in what
Matsuda says: a shared assumption about the weight of the anti-racist
consensus, a conviction that at least overt racists are an unpopular
minority, that authority is likely to side with us against them. This
hopeful conviction about the magnitude of racist expression in America
provides the hidden and rather unexpected foundation for the hate
speech movement. Why would you entrust authority with enlarged powers
of regulating the speech of unpopular minorities, unless you were
confident that the unpopular minorities would be racists, not blacks?
Lawrence may know that racial incidents are never "isolated," but he
must also believe them to be less than wholly systemic. You don't go
to the teacher to complain about the school bully unless you know that
the teacher is on your side. <p>

The tacit confidence of critical race theory in the anti-racist
consensus also enables its criticism of neutral principles. This
becomes clear when one considers the best arguments in favor of such
principles. Thus David Coles, a law professor at Georgetown
University, suggests that <p>

in a democratic society the only speech government is likely to
succeed in regulating will be that of the politically marginalized. If
an idea is sufficiently popular, a representative government will lack
the political wherewithal to suppress it, irrespective of the First
Amendment. But if an idea is unpopular, the only thing that may
protect it from the majority is a strong constitutional norm of
content-neutrality. <p>

Reverse his assumptions about whose speech is marginalized and you
stand the argument on its head. If blatantly racist speech is
unpopular and stigmatized, a strong constitutional norm of content-
neutrality may be its best hope for protection. For these critics,
however,  that is a damning argument against content-neutrality. <p>

This, then, is the political ambiguity that haunts the new academic
activism. "Our colleagues of color, struggling to carry the multiple
burdens of token representative, role model and change agent in
increasingly hostile environments, needed to know that the
institutions in which they worked stood behind them," declare our
critical race theorists in their joint manifesto. Needed to know that
the institutions in which they worked stood behind them: I have
difficulty imagining this sentiment expressed by  activists in the
'60s, who defined themselves in a proudly adversarial relation to
authority and its institutions. Here is the crucial difference this
time around. The contemporary aim is not to resist power, but to
enlist power. <p>

V. <p>

"Critical race theory challenges ahistoricism and insists on a
contextual/historical analysis of the law." So states the manifesto,
and it is not necessarily a bad principle. What it suggests to me,
however, is that we get down to cases, and consider, as these
theorists do not, the actual results of various regimes of hate speech
regulation. <p>

Surveying United Nations conventions urging the criminalization of
racist speech, Matsuda bemoans the fact that the United States, out of
First Amendment scruple, has declined fully to endorse such
resolutions. By contrast, she commends to our attention nations such
as Canada and the United Kingdom. Canada's appeal to the hate speech
movement is obvious; after all, the new Canadian Bill of Rights has
not been allowed (as Matsuda observes) to interfere with its national
statutes governing hate propaganda. And Canada's Supreme Court has
recently promulgated MacKinnon's statutory definition of pornography
as the law of the land. What you don't hear from the hate speech
theorists is that the first casualty of the MacKinnonite anti-
obscenity ruling was a gay and lesbian bookshop in Toronto, which was
raided by the police because of a lesbian magazine it carried.
(Homosexual literature is a frequent target of Canada's restrictions
on free expression.) Nor are they likely to mention that in June
copies of Black Looks: Race and Representation by the well-known black
feminist scholar Bell Hooks, a book widely assigned in women's studies
courses, was confiscated by Canadian authorities as possible "hate
literature." Is the Canadian system really a beacon of hope? <p>

Even more perplexing, especially in the context of an insistence on
challenging ahistoricism and attending to context, is the nomination
of Britain as an exemplar of a more enlightened free speech
jurisprudence. Does anyone believe that racism has subsided in Britain
since the adoption of the 1965 Race Relations Act forbidding racial
defamation? Or that the legal climate in that country is more
conducive to searching political debate? Ask any British newspaperman
about that. When Harry Evans, then editor of the London Times,
famously proclaimed that the British press was, by comparison to ours,
only "half-free," he was not exaggerating much. The result of
Britain's judicial climate is to make the country a net importer of
libel suits launched by tycoons who are displeased with their
biographers. Everyone knows that a British libel suit is like a Reno
divorce. It is rather a mordant irony that American progressives
should propose Britain, and its underdeveloped protection of
expression, as a model to emulate at a time when many progressives in
Britain are agitating for a bill of rights and broad First Amendment-
style protections. <p>

And what of speech codes on American campuses? The record may surprise
some advocates of regulations. "When the aclu enters the debate by
challenging the University of Michigan's efforts to provide a safe
harbor for its Black, Latino and Asian students," Lawrence writes, "we
should not be surprised that nonwhite students feel abandoned." In
light of the actual record of enforcement, however, the situation
might be viewed differently. During the year in which Michigan's
speech code was enforced, more than twenty blacks were charged--by
whites--with racist speech. As Strossen notes, not a single instance
of white racist speech was punished, a fact that makes Lawrence's talk
of a "safe harbor" seem more wishful than informed. <p>

At Michigan, a full disciplinary hearing was conducted only in the
case of a black social work student who was charged with saying, in a
class discussion of research projects, that he believed homosexuality
was an illness, and that he was developing a social work approach to
move homosexuals toward heterosexuality. ("These charges will haunt me
for the rest of my life," the student claimed in a court affidavit.)
By my lights, this is a good example of how speech codes kill
critique. I think that the student's views about homosexuality (which
may or may not have been well-intentioned) are both widespread and
unlikely to survive intellectual scrutiny. Regrettably, we have not
yet achieved a public consensus in this country on the moral
legitimacy (or, more precisely, the moral indifference) of
homosexuality. Yet it may well be that a class on social work is not
an inappropriate forum for a rational discussion of why the "disease"
model of sexual difference has lost credibility among social
scientists. (In a class on social work, this isn't p.c. brainwashing,
this is education.) The trouble is, you cannot begin to conduct this
conversation when you outlaw the expression of the view that you would
criticize. <p>

Critical race theorists are fond of the ideal of conversation. "This
chapter attempts to begin a conversation about the First Amendment,"
Matsuda writes toward the end of her contribution. "Most important, we
must continue this discussion," Lawrence writes toward the end of his.
It is too easy to lose sight of the fact that the conversation to
which they are devoted is aimed at limiting conversation. If there are
costs to speech, then there are costs also to curtailing speech, often
unpredictable ones. <p>

Speech codes, to be sure, may be more narrowly and responsibly
tailored, and the Stanford rules--carefully drafted by scholars, like
Thomas Grey, with civil libertarian sympathies--have rightly been
taken as a model of such careful delimitation. For rather than
following the arguments against racist speech to their natural
conclusion, the Stanford rules prohibit only insulting expression that
conveys "direct and visceral hatred or contempt" for people on the
basis of their sex, race, color, handicap, religion, sexual
orientation or national and ethnic origin, and that is "addressed
directly to the individual or individuals whom it insults or
stigmatizes." <p>

Chances are, the Stanford rule won't do much harm. Chances are, too,
it won't do much good. As long as the eminently reasonable Grey is
drafting and enforcing the restrictions, I won't lose much sleep over
it. Yet we must be clear how inadequate the code is as a response to
the powerful arguments that were marshaled to support it. Contrast the
following two statements addressed to a black freshman at Stanford: <p>

<UL>
<LI> 
LeVon, if you find yourself struggling in your classes here, you
should realize it isn't your fault. It's simply that you're the
beneficiary of a disruptive policy of affirmative action that places
underqualified, underprepared and often undertalented black students
in demanding educational environments like this one. The policy's
egalitarian aims may be well-intentioned, but given the fact that
aptitude tests place African Americans almost a full standard
deviation below the mean, even controlling for socioeconomic
disparities, they are also profoundly misguided. The truth is, you
probably don't belong here, and your college experience will be a long
downhill slide. <P>

<LI> Out of my face, jungle bunny. <p>
</UL>

Surely there is no doubt which is likely to be more "wounding" and
alienating to its intended audience. Under the Stanford speech
regulations, however, the first is protected speech, and the second
may well not be: a result that makes a mockery of the words-that-wound
rationale. <p>

If you really want to penalize such wounding words, it makes no sense
to single out gutter epithets--which, on many college campuses, are
more likely to stigmatize the speaker than their intended victim--and
leave the far more painful disquisition alone. In American society
today, the real power commanded by racism is likely to vary inversely
with the vulgarity with which it is expressed. Black professionals
soon learn that it is the socially disfranchised--the lower class, the
homeless--who are most likely to hail them as "niggers." The circles
of power have long since switched to a vocabulary of indirection.
Unfortunately, those who pit the First Amendment against the
Fourteenth Amendment invite us to worry more about speech codes than
coded speech. <p>

I suspect that many of those liberals who supported Stanford's
restrictions on abusive language did so because they thought it was
the civil thing to do. Few imagined that, say, the graduation rates or
gpas of Stanford's blacks (or Asians, gays, and so on) are likely to
rise significantly as a result. Few imagined, that is, that the
restrictions would lead to substantive rights or minority empowerment.
They just believed that gutter epithets violate the sort of civility
that ought to prevail on campus. In spirit, then, the new regulations
were little different from the rules about curfews, drinking or the
after-hours presence of women in male dormitories that once governed
America's campuses and preoccupied their disciplinary committees. <p>

Not that rules about civility are without value. Lawrence charges that
civil libertarians who disagree with him about speech regulations may
be "unconscious racists." I don't doubt this is so; I don't doubt that
some of those who support speech codes are unconscious racists. What I
doubt is whether the imputation of racism is the most effective way to
advance the debate between civil rights and civil liberties. <P>

VI. <p>

"What is ultimately <CODE>[some stuff seems to be wiped here -meng]</CODE>
society," write the authors of Words That Wound, and they are right.

In parsing the reasoning of the movement against hate speech, it is
essential that we not miss the civic forest for the legal trees. Far
beyond the wrangling over particular statutes and codes lies an
encompassing vision of state and civil society. And its wellsprings
are to be found not in legal scholarship or critical theory, but in
the more powerful cultural currents identified with the "recovery
movement." <p>

At the vital center of the hate speech movement is the seductive
vision of the therapeutic state. This vision is presaged in the
manifesto itself: <p>

<BLOCKQUOTE>
Too often victims of hate speech find themselves without the words to
articulate what they see, feel and know. In the absence of theory and
analysis that give them a diagnosis and a name for the injury they
have suffered, they internalize the injury done them and are rendered
silent in the fact of continuing injury. Critical race theory names
the injury and identifies its origins.
</BLOCKQUOTE> <p>

This sounds, of course, like a popular primer on how psychotherapy is
supposed to work; with a few changes, the passage might be addressed
to survivors of toxic parenting. Indeed, "alexathymia"--the inability
to name and articulate one's feelings--is a faddish diagnosis in
psychiatry these days. Nor is critical race theory's affinity with the
booming recovery industry a matter of chance. These days the recovery
movement is perhaps the principal source of resistance to the older
and much-beleaguered American tradition of individualism. <p>

"When the ideology is deconstructed and injury is named, subordinated
victims find their voices," the manifesto asserts. "They discover they
are not alone in their subordination. They are empowered." Here the
recovery/survivor-group paradigm leads to a puzzling contradiction. We
are told that victims of racist speech are cured--that is, empowered--
when they learn they are "not alone" in their subordination, but
subordinated as a group. But elsewhere we are told that what makes
racist speech peculiarly wounding is that it conveys precisely the
message that you are a member of a subordinated group. How can the
suggestion of group subordination be the poison and the antidote? <p>

The therapeutic claims made for critical race theory cut against the
hate speech offensive in more important ways. For if we took these
claims at face value, critical race theory would not buttress speech
regulations, it would obviate the need for them. The problem about
which Lawrence worries, that racist speech "silenc[es] members of
those groups who are its targets," would naturally be addressed not
through bureaucratic regulations, but through the sort of
deconstruction and critique that will enable victims, according to
critical race theory, to "find their voices." And here lies another
painful irony. All this sounds very much like Justice Brandeis's hoary
and much-scorned prescription for redressing harmful speech: "more
speech." <p>

Scholars such as Delgado and Matsuda understandably emphasize the
adverse psychological effects of racial abuse. "Because they
constantly hear racist messages, minority children, not surprisingly,
come to question their competence, intelligence and worth," Delgado
writes. And he further notes that the psychic injuries incurred by
racist speech have additional costs down the road: "The person who is
timid, withdrawn, bitter, hypertense or psychotic will almost
certainly fare poorly in employment settings." (As a member of the
Harvard faculty, I would venture that there are exceptions to this
rule.)  But the proposed therapeutic regime is no mere talking cure.
Indeed, in the Republic of Self-Esteem, we are invited to conceive of
the lawsuit as therapy. "When victimized by racist language," Delgado
explains, "victims must be able to threaten and institute legal
action, thereby relieving the sense of helplessness that leads to
psychological harm." <p>

A similar therapeutic function could be played by criminal
proceedings, in Matsuda's view. When the government does nothing about
racist speech, she argues, it actually causes a second injury. "The
second injury is the pain of knowing that the government provides no
remedy and offers no recognition of the dehumanizing experience that
victims of hate propaganda are subjected to." In fact, "The
government's denial of personhood through its denial of legal recourse
may even be more painful than the initial act of hatred." Of course,
what this grievance presupposes is that the state is there, in loco
parentis, to confer personhood in the first place. Finally Matsuda
must repair not to an instrumental conception of the state, but to a
conception of it as the "official embodiment of the society we live
in," which is rather remote and abstracted from the realities of our
heterogeneous populace, with its conflicting norms and jostling
values. <p>

Psychotherapy cannot do the hard work of politics. Yet a similar
therapeutic vision animates the more broad-gauged campus regulations
such as those adopted in the late 1980s at the University of
Connecticut. These rules sought to proscribe such behavior as, inter
alia: <p>

<UL>
<LI> Treating people differently solely because they are in some way
different from the majority.... <p>

<LI> Imitating stereotypes in speech or mannerisms.... <p>

<LI> Attributing objections to any of the above actions to
"hypersensitivity"of the targeted individual or group. <p>
</UL>

That last provision was especially cunning. It meant that even if you
believed that a complainant was overreacting to an innocuous remark,
the attempt to defend yourself in this way would serve only as proof
of your guilt. <p>

The rationale of the university's rules was made explicit in its
general prohibition on actions that undermined the "security or self-
esteem" of persons or groups. (Would awarding low grades count?) Not
surprisingly, the university's expressed objective was to provide "a
positive environment in which everyone feels comfortable working or
living." It was unclear whether any provisions were to be made for
those who did not feel "comfortable" working or living under such
restrictive regulations. In any event, they were later dropped under
threat of legal action. <p>

It may be that widespread skepticism about the distinction between the
public and the private made it inevitable that the recovery movement
would translate into a politics; and that this politics would center
on a vocabulary of trauma and abuse, in which the verbal forms and the
physical forms are seen as equivalent. Perhaps it was inevitable that
the citizen at the center of the political theory of the Enlightenment
would be replaced by the infant at the center of modern depth
psychology and its popular therapeutic variants. The inner child may
hurt and grieve, as we have been advised. But may the inner child also
vote? <p>

VII. <p>

What cannot be sidestepped, finally, is the larger question, the
political question, of how we came to decide that our energies were
best directed not at strengthening our position in the field of public
discourse, but at trying to move its boundary posts. I detect two
motivations. <p>

In the academy, there has been increased attention to the formative
power of language in the construction of our social reality, to
language as "performative," as itself counting as action and
constituting a "speech act." These are phrases and ideas that are owed
to ordinary language philosophy, of the kind that the Oxford
philosopher J.L. Austin developed in the middle of the century, but
now MacKinnon adds them to her argumentative arsenal in her latest
book. The notion of the speech act certainly acquires new force when
the act in question is rape. <p>

MacKinnon's emphasis on the realness, the act-like nature, of
expression receives an interesting twist in the attempt by some hate
speech theorists to "textualize" the Fourteenth Amendment. If
expression is act, then act must be expression. If the First Amendment
is about speech, then so, too, is the Fourteenth Amendment. Following
this reasoning, Lawrence has proposed in an influential
reinterpretation of legal history that Brown v. Board, and, by
analogy, all subsequent civil rights decisions and legislation, are in
fact prohibitions on expressive behavior. In Lawrence's reading, they
forbid not racism, but the expression of racism. In line with this
argument, he tells us that "discriminatory conduct is not racist
unless it also conveys the message of white supremacy," thus
contributing to the social construction of racism. <p>

This is a bold and unsettling claim, which commits Lawrence to the
view that in the case of discriminatory conduct, the only crime is to
get caught. By this logic, racial redlining by bankers is not racist
unless people find out about it. And the crusading district attorney
who uncovers hidden evidence of those bankers' discrimination is not
to be hailed as a friend of justice, after all: by bringing it to
light, he was only activating the racist potential of those misdeeds.
Should anti-discrimination policy be founded, then, on the principle
of "don't ask, don't tell"? <p>

Lawrence's analysis of segregation reaches the same surprising
conclusion: "The nonspeech elements are byproducts of the main message
rather than the message being simply a by-product of unlawful
conduct." By this logic, poverty is not really about material
deprivation; it is really about the message of class inequality. We
might conclude, then, that the problem of economic inequality would
most naturally be redressed by promulgating a self-affirmative lower-
class identity along the lines of Poverty Is Beautiful. Words may not
be cheap, but they are much less costly than afdc and job training
programs. <p>

Something, let us agree, has gone very wrong. The pendulum has swung
from the absurd position that words don't matter to the equally absurd
position that only words matter. Critical race theory, it appears, has
fallen under the sway of a species of academic nominalism. Yes, speech
is a species of action. Yes, there are some acts that only speech can
perform. But there are some acts that speech alone cannot accomplish.
You cannot heal the sick by pronouncing them well. You cannot lift up
the poor by declaring them rich. <p>

In their manifesto, the authors of Words That Wound identify their
fight as "a fight for a constitutional community where `freedom' does
not implicate a right to degrade and humiliate another human being."
These are heady words. Like much sweepingly utopian rhetoric, however,
they invite a regime so heavily policed as to be incompatible with
democracy. Once we are forbidden verbally to degrade and to humiliate,
will we retain the moral autonomy to elevate and to affirm? <p>

In the end, the preference for the substantive liberties supposedly
vouchsafed by the Fourteenth Amendment over the formal ones enshrined
in the First Amendment rehearses the classic disjunction that Isaiah
Berlin analyzed a generation ago in "Two Conceptions of Liberty," but
without having learned from him. Berlin's words have aged little.
"Negative" liberty, the simple freedom from external coercion, seemed
to him a truer and more humane ideal than the goals of those who seek
in the great, disciplined, authoritarian structures the ideal of
"positive" self-mastery by classes, or peoples or the whole of
mankind. It is truer, because it recognizes the fact that human goals
are many, not all of them commensurable, and in perpetual rivalry with
one another.  To suggest, as the critical race theorists do, that
equality must precede liberty is simply to jettison the latter without
securing the former. The First Amendment may not secure us substantive
liberties, but neither will its abrogation. <p>

It is not hard to explain the disenchantment among minority critics
with such liberal mainstays as the "marketplace of ideas" and the
ideal of public discourse. I take their disenchantment to be a part of
a larger crisis of faith. The civil rights era witnessed the
development of a national consensus--hammered out noisily, and against
significant resistance--that racism, at least overt racism, was wrong.
Amazingly enough, things like reason, argument and moral suasion did
play a significant role in changing attitudes toward "race relations."
But what have they done for us lately? <p>

For all his good sense, Harry Kalven Jr. was spectacularly wrong when
he wrote: "One is tempted to say that it will be a sign that the Negro
problem has basically been solved when the Negro begins to worry about
group libel protection." Quite the contrary. The disillusionment with
liberal ideology that is now rampant among many minority scholars and
activists stems from the lack of progress in the struggle for racial
equality over the past fifteen years. Liberalism's principle of formal
equality seems to have led us so far, but no further. As Patricia J.
Williams observes, it "put the vampire back in its coffin but it was
no silver stake." <p>

The problem may be that the continuing economic and material
inequality between black America and white America, and the continuing
immiseration of large segments of black America, cannot be erased
simply through better racial attitudes. Poverty, white and black, can
take on a life of its own, to the point that removing the conditions
that caused it can do little to alleviate it. The '80s may have been
the "Cosby Decade," but you wouldn't know it from the South Bronx. It
has become clear, in other words, that the political economy of race
and poverty can no longer be reduced to a mirror of what whites think
of blacks. <p>

In some ways the intellectuals have not caught up to this changing
reality. Generals are not the only ones who are prone to fight the
last war. Rather than responding to the grim new situation with new
and subtler modes of socioeconomic analysis, we have finessed the gap
between rhetoric and reality by forging new and subtler definitions of
the word "racism." Hence a new model of institutional racism is one
that can operate in the absence of actual racists. By redefining our
terms, we can always say of the economic gap between black and white
America: the problem is still racism ... and, by stipulation, it would
be true. But the grip of this vocabulary has tended to foreclose the
more sophisticated models of political economy that we so desperately
need. I cannot otherwise explain why some of our brightest legal minds
believe that substantive liberties can be vouchsafed and substantive
inequities redressed by punishing rude remarks; or why their analysis
of racism owes more to the totalizing theory of Catharine MacKinnon
than to the work of scholar-investigators like Douglas Massey or
William Julius Wilson or Gary Orfield--people who, whatever their
differences, are attempting to discover how things work in the real
world, never confusing the empirical with the merely anecdotal. <p>

Critical race theory has served, then, as a labor-saving device. For
if racism can be fully textualized, if its real existence is in its
articulation, then racial inequity can be prized free from the moss
and soil of political economy. "Gender is sexual," MacKinnon wrote in
Toward a Feminist Theory of the State. "Pornography constitutes the
meaning of that sexuality." By extension, racist speech must prove to
be the real content of racial subordination: banish it, and you banish
subordination. The perverse result is a see-no-evil, hear-no-evil
approach toward racial inequality. Unfortunately, even if hate did
disappear, aggregative patterns of segregation and segmentation in
housing and employment would not disappear. And conversely, in the
absence of this material and economic gap, not many people would care
about racist speech. <p>

Beliefs that go untested and unchallenged cannot prosper. The critical
race theorists must be credited with helping to reinvigorate the
debate about freedom of expression; the intelligence, the innovation
and the thoughtfulness of their best work deserve a reasoned response,
and not, as so often happens, demonization and dismissal. And yet, for
all the passion and all the scholarship that the critical race
theorists have expended upon the problem of hate speech, I cannot
believe that it will capture their attention for very much longer. "It
is strange how rapidly things change," wrote Kalven in 1965. "Just a
little more than a decade ago we were all concerned with devising
legal controls for the libeling of groups.... Ironically, once the
victory was won, the momentum for such legal measures seemed to
dissipate, and the problem has all but disappeared from view." It is
strange how rapidly things change--and change back. But the results, I
suspect, will be similar this time around. The advocates of speech
restrictions will grow disenchanted not with their failures, but with
their victories, and the movement will come to seem yet another
curious byway in the long history of our racial desperation. <p>

And yet the movement will not have been without its political costs. I
cannot put it better than Charles Lawrence himself, who writes: "I
fear that by framing the debate as we have--as one in which the
liberty of free speech is in conflict with the elimination of racism--
we have advanced the cause of racial oppression and placed the bigot
on the moral high ground, fanning the rising flames of racism." He
does not intend it as such, but I read this passage as a harsh rebuke
to the movement itself. As the critical race theory manifesto
acknowledges, "This debate has deeply divided the liberal civil
rights/civil liberties community." And so it has. It has created
hostility between old allies and fractured longtime coalitions. Was it
worth it? Justice Black's words may return, like the sound of an
unheeded tocsin, to haunt us: "Another such victory and I am undone." <p>

<HR>
Henry Louis Gates Jr. is W.E.B. Du Bois Professor of the Humanities at
Harvard University and co-editor of Transition. <p>
</DOC>