
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B08-367</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA062-000353-B004-88</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.familypolicy.com:80/positions/pp0731199601.html 206.107.214.109 19970115204333 text/html 34564
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Enterprise/2.0a
Date: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 20:51:43 GMT
Accept-ranges: bytes
Last-modified: Tue, 01 Oct 1996 21:40:06 GMT
Content-length: 34358
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<title> The Indoctrination in Education  </title>

<body bgcolor=#000080 text=#ffffff link=#ff0000 vlink=#ff0000>

<h2 align=center> The Indoctrination in Education  </h2>
<h3 align=center> A Position Paper by Brannon Howse  </h3>
Today's anti-Christian, pro-humanist movement is real and poses a series threat to the moral and spiritual fabric of our society. This movement with its relativistic and atheistic philosophies strives to make obsolete and extinct the values, principles and beliefs of the Judeo Christian family. The very same values, principles and beliefs that this great country was founded upon. The family has always been the cornerstone of our society. It is through our families we are most influenced, especially in those early years. If those who are apart of the New Age Movement and the liberal left, (which includes the educational elite) are to accomplish their desired goals and plans, it is crucial they break down and undermine the authority of the most influential institution of all time, the family. Just how does this humanist, relativistic and politically correct movement of today plan on attacking the family? Through the public educational system. Thomas Sowell, an economist and senior fellow at Hoover Institution, and a nationally syndicated columnist has said, "Does anyone ask himself why it takes years and years to teach school children so-called "sex education?" Obviously it does not. What takes years and years is to wear down the values they were taught at home and lead them toward wholly different attitudes and different conceptions of the world. Brainwashing takes time-and it takes time away from academic subjects." Sowell goes on to say, "By what right do other people usurp the responsibilities of parents and use schools to carry on guerrilla warfare against the values that parents have taught their children?" "The tie between parents and children is older, stronger, more intimate, and more demanding of government respect than any other attachment in society. Teachers were once rigorously taught that they acted merely in loco parentis-in the place of parents-when they had temporary charge of children. Society's appreciation of that fact created a bond of trust between parents and schools. That bond has been strained in recent weeks when the nation's largest public school system-New York City's-moved to distribute condoms without parental consent or notice. Whether or not one agrees that teens should be given contraceptive devices, the action of Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez shows how far American schools have come from that time when public educators recognized that they acted only under limited and delegated authority."
<p> Why do we see such a blatant attempt by the educational establishment to undermine parental authority? As well as obtain exclusive and overwhelming power in deciding what they teach and promote to our children?. Brooks Alexander hit the nail on the head when he said, "In the ideological contest for cultural supremacy, public education is the prime target; it influences the most people in the most pervasive way at the most impressionable age. No other social institution has anything close to the same potential for mass indoctrination." John Dunphy, a well known humanist writer wrote, "I am convinced that the battle for humankind's future must be waged and won in the public school classroom by teachers.....These teachers must embody the same selfless dedication as the most rabid fundamentalist preachers, for they will be ministers of another sort, utilizing a classroom instead of a pulpit to convey humanist values in whatever subject they teach, regardless of the education level-preschool, day-care or large state university. The classroom must and will become an arena of conflict between the old and the new-the rotting corpse of Christianity, together with all its adjacent evils and misery, and the new faith of humanism. Humanism will emerge triumphant. It must if the family of humankind is to survive."
<p> Marilyn Ferguson admits in her book, The Aquarian Conspiracy, of the many "Aquarian Conspirators" that she surveyed, "more were involved in education than in any other single category of work. They were teachers, administrators, policy makers, and educational psychologists."
<p> Through today's educational system, the ancient Judeo Christian values and ideals are being replaced with a new consciousness. A consciousness that focusses on the deity of each individual no matter how great or small. To prove my point listen to what Gloria Steinem, a well-known feminist and humanist stated, "By the year 2000 we will, I hope, raise our children to believe in human potential, not God." The New Age Movement proclaims that the insane and insincere doctrine that man is full of sin and needs to be cleansed with the blood of Jesus Christ, lest he be condemned to hell is false. Such a belief would only be taught by individuals who want to control and manipulate the lives and actions of others. Gloria Steinem again proves my point, when in an interview with Saturday Education in February 1973, she made the following statement. "The point is to enlarge personal choice, to produce for each child the fullest possible range of human experience without negating or limiting the choices already made by the adults closest to her or him."
<p> Parents, who is the adult that is closest to your child or children? You are, the mother and father. In short, Gloria Steinem is saying it is imperative that we teach the children that their beliefs and values do not have to be the beliefs and values of their parents. Each child should know that they have the right to choose what they believe. Of course, Gloria Steinem hopes that by undermining the authority of a child's parent, it would be easier to influence that child in her humanistic, atheistic and relativistic doctrine. What small child would not naturally choose to follow and accept a philosophy that encourages them to make their own decisions and never uses the word "NO!" After all, there is no such thing as right and wrong in this new age. Besides, to tell a child "No" only has a negative psychological effect on his early childhood development; thus, potentially creating an emotional scar he would carry with him the rest of his life.
<p> "Central to this questioning of authority is a questioning of the role of the central authority in the child's life-parents. Alternative ways of constructing individual values, independently of parental values, are recurring themes of curriculum materials on the most disparate subjects, from sex to death." Our children are being educated in the belief that "decisions are not to be made by relying on traditional values passed on by parents or the surrounding society. Instead, those values are themselves to be questioned and compared with the values and behavior of other individuals or other societies. This is to be done in a neutral or "nonjudgmental" manner, which does not seek to determine a "right" or "wrong" way, but rather to find out what feels best to the particular individuals. This general approach has been called "values clarification", (which we will discuss in chapters to come). Why is such a blatant attempt being made to undermine the authority and influence that parents have on their children? It is because, "Parents are the greatest obstacle to any brainwashing of children, and it is precisely, the whole brainwashing of children, and it is precisely the parents' values which are to be displaced. If to the periphery, the whole brainwashing operation is jeopardized. Not only will individual parents counter what the brainwashing say; parents as a group can bring pressure to bear against the various psychological conditioning programs, and in some places get them forced out of the schools."
<p> Today's educational system is doing to the children of today exactly what Satan did to Adam and Eve years ago. Satan in the Garden of Eden, deceived Adam and Eve into accepting his humanistic, atheistic and relativistic lie. Satan appeared to Eve in the garden and he very convincingly said, "Did God really say you must not eat from the tree that is in the middle of the garden?" If I were to paraphrase this scene into today's language it would sound like this.
<p> Satan: "Did God really say you can't eat from this tree?" Eve: Well yes, God has told us that we could eat fruit from any tree in the garden that we want, except the tree that is in the middle of the garden. He even told us not to touch it or we would die. Satan: Oh come on, Give me a break, you will not die. The only reason He told you not to eat the fruit on this tree is because He knows that if you do you will be just like Him. You see, if you eat the fruit on this tree you will have an esoteric experience. You will have all knowledge, you will know everything. He also knows that if you eat the fruit on this tree you will be just like Him, a God. You will be able to decide what is right and what is wrong. You will be able to create your own reality, control your own destiny. You will be your own salvation.
<p> Today's educational system along with the help of the media tangles the forbid fruit of the New Age Movement in front of today's kids, telling them of the joys and benefits of partaking.
<p> When Satan appeared to Eve in the Garden of Eden, in the form of a serpent, Satan did not have the advantage of appealing to Eve's sin nature. How much easier it is for Satan to deceive and devour the Adam's and Eve's of today because of their sin nature. A sin nature that naturally wants to accept and follow the lies of Satan that are represented in the New Age Movement. This sin nature of ours makes it crucial that we have the Word of God hidden in our hearts that we may not sin against God. I can not say enough about the importance of reading and memorizing scripture with your child or children, at the youngest possible age. Proverbs 22:6 says, "train up a child in the way he should go and when he is old he will not depart from it."
<p> Kids today know more than we give them credit for, and sometimes more than we would like them to know. I am reminded of a story my Pastor friend, Richard Reynerston told in his sermon one Sunday morning. "My daughter and her husband are being transferred to Chicago, Illinois. My daughter who is a first grade teacher, was very worried about how she would break the news to her first graders, unsure of how they would handle a new teacher coming in at the middle of the year. She felt that it would be best to sit her first graders down and explain the situation and try to get them excited about the new incoming teacher. She explained to her class that she was moving and that they would be getting a new teacher. 'We are not sure who the new teacher will be, but I want you to be on your best behavior and help the new teacher in what ever way you can.' My daughter noticed two of her first grade girls whispering to each other and then laughing. My daughter asked, 'what is so funny?' To her surprise they responded, 'Maybe President Bush would like to be our new teacher, he is out of a job, and we hear he is bored." Pastor Reynerston told this story to demonstrate that kids today know more than we give them credit for. We think they may not be taking it all in, when in actuality they are. We must be busy instilling our values into our kids, at the youngest possible age, especially in this day and time. As Dan Quayle said on February 19, 1993, at the Conservative Political Action Conference, "Teach your kids values or someone else will."
<p> Engrave your principles and values on the heart of your children in a way that has promised to never return void. Isaiah 55:11, So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth; it shall not return unto me void....." Proverbs 3:3 Tells us to write the laws and commandments of God upon thine heart and bind them about thy neck. Give your child wisdom through the Word of God and this wisdom will keep them from evil. Proverbs 2:10-12 tells us the benefits of wisdom. When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul, Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee, To deliver thee from the way of evil man, from men that speak perverse things. God's word tells us that if we help our children get wisdom we are giving them something better than rubies or silver or gold. Proverbs 3:13-15 Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding; For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies; and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her.
<p> There are many passages of scripture that tell us of the importance and benefits of committing scripture to memory, but this next verse tells us that we can use the Word of God as a weapon.
<p> Hebrews 4:12
<br> For the word of God is living and active. Sharper than any double-edged sword, it penetrates even to dividing soul and spirit, joints and marrow; it judges the thoughts and attitudes of the heart.
<p> This next statement makes my blood boil. During a television interview, while discussing fundamental Christians in Nebraska, then state senator Peter Hoagland said, "What we are most interested in of course, are the children themselves, I don't thing any of us in the legislature have any quarrel with the right of the reverend or the members of his flock to practice their religion, but we don't think that they should be entitled to impose decisions or religious philosophies on their children which could seriously undermine those children's ability to deal in this complicated world when they grow up." At the time of this statement Peter Hoagland was a state senator for Nebraska. Peter Hoagland is now at the time of this publication a United States Congressmen for the second district of Nebraska. Peter Hoagland was elected to his first term in 1988 and he is now serving in his third term, which ends in January of 1995. Can you believe that such a statement is coming from the mouth of a man that is putting laws on the books. The entire reason for the pilgrims coming to America was to escape religious persecution. A United States Congress men is suppose to be a servant of and for the people, protecting their rights that are listed in the Bill of Rights. At my last look at the Bill of Rights, the freedom of religion was still in there. Telling a parent that they do not have the right to indoctrinate their children in their faith, does not sound like someone who is interested in protecting the rights of the people, that are guaranteed by the Bill of Rights. It is a chilling thought to know that the personal agenda and beliefs of a group of people in a few strategic places can potentially effect the freedom of many.
<p> In March 1992, I was in Lincoln, Nebraska. In my speech I mentioned this quote by Congressmen Hoagland, as well as the fact that he was up for re-election in November. The next Tuesday morning back in St. Paul, I received a phone call from Hoagland's Press Secretary. "So Mr. Howse, we understand that you were in our state this past weekend and your were saying some things about the congressmen they were not true, and we would greatly appreciate it if you would cease and desist." "Well", I said, "it is true that I was in Nebraska this past weekend and yes I quoted Mr. Hoagland, but you know as well as I do that I quoted him accurately." After a few minutes of discussing whether or not Congressmen Hoagland had made this statement or not, to his surprise, I informed the press secretary that I had the television interview on which Hoagland had made this statement on tape. I sent it off to him, and we never heard from the Congressman or his office ever again. The congressman won re-election in November of 1992, but barely.
<p> It is very clear through our brief look into education that a concerted effect is being made to limit the power and influence that parents have in the process of instilling chosen values and beliefs into their children. The facts are clear, the educational system and liberal elites are going to great strides to ridicule parental respect and authority thus ensuring they have a great deal of influence and power in the indoctrination process. According to John Duphy, it is a must if the family of humankind is to survive.
<p> According to reporter Robin Wilson of The Chronicle of Higher Education, the NEA "has attacked parents' moves to gain more control, saying that they have gone overboard and that teachers cannot be effective under power veto power." What they can't be as effective at the indoctrination of your children. The NEA desires that parents, who are also taxpayers, have no control in the educational system. Such a desire is like wishing that your boss, who owns the company, had no say on what went on in the day to day operating of things. You can pay the bills and have the financial responsibility of everything, but don't give us any advice and you can not have any power to call the shots.
<p> One of these teachers unions was started by John D. Rockefeller, which was called the General Education Board, which he established in 1902. To Ensure control of this tax-exempt organization he put his assistant, Frederick T. Gates, in charge as chairman Gates revealed the Rockefeller philosophy on education in the board's "Occasional Letter, No. 1." 'In our dreams we have limitless resources and the people yield themselves with perfect docility to our molding hands. The present educational conventions fade from our minds, unharmed by tradition, we work our good will upon a grateful and responsive rural folk.' Of course this influence grew to include the big city as well.
<p> Gary Kah, author of En Route to Global Occupation, explains how large sums of money have been contributed to the General Education Board by the Rockefeller's. "Between 1902 and 1907, John Sr. would give a total of $43 million to the GEB. And from 1917 to 1919 he and his son John, D., Jr., gave a combined total of $200 million to the GEB, the Rockefeller Foundation, and the Laura Spelman Rockefeller Memorial. The total amount of Rockefeller funds given to influence education from 1902 to 1930, in today's money would be equivalent to more than $2 billion. This is an incredible sum of money going to promote globalism and socialism within education."
<p> Many such socialistic, humanistic and globalistic philosophies have been promoted by the "father of modern education", John Dewey. John Dewey has said, "There is no God and so soul. Hence, there are no needs for the props of traditional religion. With dogma and creed excluded, then immutable (unchangeable) truth is also dead and buried. There is no room for fixed, natural law or permanent moral absolutes."
<p> Think about this folks, George Washington, who could not tell a lie, is called the father of our country, and John Dewey, a liar, is called the father of modern education. John Dewey, a committed humanist who promoted the humanistic lie of satan, has had a major influence on many of today's educators. "Today, twenty percent of all American school superintendents and forty percent of all teacher college heads have advanced degrees from columbia where Dewey spent many years as the Department head."
<p> The National Education Association, "the largest union in America (with 2 million members and an operating budget of $135 million) and the most influential and powerful force in the education establishment." The NEA has also received a large amount of funds from the Rockefeller and Carnegie Foundations. "By 1934, the NEA adopted John Dewey's philosophy of humanism, socialism, and globalism, and incorporated it into the classroom." "Dewey's association with the Rockefeller family went back a long way as he taught four of the five Rockefeller brothers, including David and Nelson."
<p> "The Rockefellers not only used their money to seize control of America's centers of teacher training, they also spent millions of dollars rewriting history books and creating textbooks that undermined patriotism and free enterprise. These books promoted Marxist propaganda to the extent that the California legislature refused to appropriate money for them. Rene Wormser concluded: 'It is difficult to believe that the Rockefeller Foundation and the National Association could have supported these textbooks. But the fact is that the Rockefeller financed them and the NEA promoted them very widely.
<p> It is also interesting to note that in the mid 1930's John Dewey visited "Russia for a time to help organize the Marxist educational system there."
<p> The NEA is really not so interested in representing teachers, as must as they are interested in promoting their own political and social agenda. A quick look at the history of the NEA proves this statement to be true. Despite the fact that "more than half of the NEA membership voted for Ronald Reagan both in 1980 and 1984," the NEA itself indorsed Jimmy Carter. "Two-Thirds of teachers polled by the NEA in 1985-86 classified their political philosophy as conservative or leaning toward conservative."
<p> Thomas Sowell is his book, Inside American Education states, "the undermining of parental authority can begin quite early." Sowell describes how an author in the "transactional analysis" school of psychology, which is often simply called "T.A." has developed a book designed for children in pre-school through third grade, entitled T.A. for tots. Sowell writes, "one of the pictures has a caption: 'Hey, this little girl is crying' and a butterfly on the side of the picture says: 'Oh! Oh! Looks like she got a spanking.' The picture of the next page shows the same girl spanking her doll and saying 'No, No!' The caption reads: 'Ah ha! Now she is being bossy and spanking her doll. Who taught her to do that?' The butterfly in the corner says: 'Could it have been daddy and mommy?' The recurring them of the book is that little boys and girls are born as little princes and princesses. At first, in infancy, they are treated that way and feel that way. But parents end up turning these princes and princesses into frogs, in their own minds, by constantly criticizing and punishing them." Sowell goes onto say that one of the morals of a story in the material was, and I am quoting directly from the book "T.A." for Tots. "Sometimes things happen you don't like. You have the right to be angry without being afraid of being punished. You have the right to tell Mommy and Daddy what you don't like about what they are doing."
<p> The not so subtle message is that mommy and daddy are being bossy when they punish you, and you have the right to tell them that you don't like it and it makes you angry. Children are being taught that they are little adults who have the right to be treated as they see fit. Indeed, we are to respect our children as human beings who have been intrusted to us by God for the purpose of raising and nourishing. But to think that a child should have the right to tell its parents that "I am mad at you because you punished me for lying, and I thing your just being bossy." is absurd. Since when was punishment suppose to be a fun and enjoyable experience. The reason so many kids are in trouble today is because they do not have the appropriate respect for rules and authority nor the understanding that there is a price or punishment for wrong choices. Sowell reports that nearly a quarter of a million copies of this material has been sold with in the past four years.
<p> "In 1979, The U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare produced a questionnaire for 'health education' which included these questions:
<p> How often do you normally masturbate (play with yourself sexually)?
<p> How often do you normally engage in light petting (playing with a girl's breast)?
<p> How often do you normally engage in heavy petting (playing with a girl's vagina and the area around it)?
<p> A book entitled Changing Bodies, Changing Lives, "a text widely used in schools and recommended by the School Library Journal, is liberally sprinkled with quotes from teens describing their sexual experiences in minute detail. Fred, a gay student, relates, 'I was so excited the first time I had sex with a guy that I came just taking my pants off....' Donna, a seventeen- year-old, describes her experience: 'I was with this guy who said, 'Let me so something to you I think you'll really like.' And that was when he went down on me and stated licking me. I was really kind of embarrassed....But it really, really felt good, and I relaxed and just got into it.' At regular intervals the authors remind their young readers, 'There's no 'right' way or 'right' age to have life experiences." and 'only you can decide' what is right."
<p> Peter B. Dow, principle developer of a controversial 5th- grade federally funded program, "A Man: A Course of Study" has said. "The notion that there are 'eternal truths' [e.g, the Ten Commandments] that must be passed down from one generation to the next.' Dow states further, 'We are trying to break down the view that because your culture is good for you, it is necessarily good for someone else.'"
<p> William Kilpatrick, Author of Why Johnny Can't Tell Right From Wrong, has said, "In these curriculums a lot of time and energy are spent exchanging opinions and exploring feelings, but practically no time is spent providing moral guidance or forming character. The virtues are not explained or discussed, no models of good behavior are provided, no reason is given why a boy or girl should want to be good in the first place. In short, students are given nothing to live by or look up to. They come away with the impression that even the most basic values are matters of dispute. Morality, they are likely to infer, is something you talk about in class but not something you need to do anything about."
<p> It's o.k. to have extremely sexually explicit curriculum, to the point of pornographic, but try to implement curriculum that promotes abstinence look out.
<p> In early 1993, A school board in Shreveport, Louisiana was sued by "concerned citizens" to censor the abstinence curriculum, Sex Respect and Facing Reality. According to Project Respect, publishers of the curriculum, who went to the aid of the school board said in a press release. "We were able to present clear documentation that abstinence is the healthiest lifestyle for our teens. Those who brought this suit presented no documents and only psycho-babble as to why promoting abstinence purportedly promotes 'a religion'." Let me share with you a few highlights from the four day trial. "Rabbi Michael told the court that it was an impossibility for the word 'spirit' to be used in any context other than a religious context. Yet he closed his testimony by stating, 'The spirit of these texts promote religion.'" The supporters of the curriculum said, "What a hoot." According to the press release, "this is the same rabbi who objected during depositions to our statement: Human reproduction has a higher meaning than animal reproduction. His objection was based on his certainty that his dog is indeed going to doggy heaven!" "Psychiatrist George Seiden argued that Sex Respect's explanation about sexual arousal was not adequate. He drew his own charts for sexual arousal-one for males and a different one for females-and he insisted that the 7th and 8th graders should be taught erotic explanations about multiple orgasms."
<p> So now if you promote abstinence your promoting a religion. Since we can't promote religion, we must be sure to be sexually explicit and graphic to the point that are kids are encouraged to have sex.
<p> Such examples of brainwashing and indoctrination are not rare and uncommon exceptions. Many parents all over the country have reported such cases of student being instructed not to tell parents what is being discussed in class. This has been documented by the United States Department of Education to have happen in Georgia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Arizona and Oregon. Phyllis Schlafly of Eagle Form reveals in a report entitled Child abuse in the Class Room, that in a "values clarification" class in Oregon third grade kids were asked, "how many of you ever wanted to beat up you parents? In what was suppose to be a "health" class in Tucson, high school students were asked, "how many of you hate your parents?" A parent in Tucson who reviewed many such course that were being used in the local school reported that they "eroded the parent-child relationship by inserting a wedge of doubt, distrust and disrespect."
<p> If you fight to have such trash removed from your child's school, be prepared to be called an Extremist. A concerned parent faxed to my office, a brochure that was produced by The National Parent, Teacher Association entitled, National PTA's Guide to EXTREMISM. Who do you think they are referring to? The brochure had this to say: "Extremism is nothing new-it has always been a part of American life. In the past, extremism gave rise to the Salem witchcraft trials...the brutality of the Ku Klux Klan, the growth of the American Communist Party and the blacklisting of the 1950's." (They sure are trying hard to paint a certain image). "They try polarize society, to intimidate their enemies and to rewrite history to serve their own uses. They try to depict a past that never really existed in an effort to reshape today and influence tomorrow."
<p> Sounds like to me they are talking about themselves. The brochure goes on to say, "Extremist oppose many efforts to reform, change or improve what exists in America calling such efforts untrue to 'traditional American Values.' "A disturbing group of extremists tries to manipulate religious values to oppose or support positions...Extremists demand total and unquestioning acceptance of their interpretations of faith and deny the possibility of other interpretations."
<p> "Extremists try to stifle the free expression of all views opposed to their own." Remember the law suit against the school board over the abstinence curriculum. If I did not know better I say they just described themselves.
<p> A case in point where the liberals themselves stifled free expression was in February 1993. Our friend Gary Bauer, President of the Family Research Council, was booked to speak before a U.S. Coast Guard prayer breakfast for over six months, only to have the whole thing canceled. Why? Because Rep Gerry E. Studds (D-Mass), who chairs the committee that oversees the Coast Guard wanted it that way. Gary Bauer said in the February 6, 1993 publication of the Washington Post, "I can't help but believe that since, in recent weeks I have criticized the president's idea about changing military rules on how homosexuality is treated, that I have stepped on the lifestyle of the congressman." According to the article in the Washington Post, "Coast Guard spokesman Capt, Ernest Blanchard said the breakfast was canceled because there were 'some concerns from members of the command that all religious affiliations were not represented.'"
<p> Nice excuse. Tell me, since when are the liberals interested in being sure that all religious beliefs or beliefs in general are respected. If they are so concerned about being fair, they should have let Gary speak. It sounds like to me that Congressman Studds and those responsible for the cancellation of Gary and the breakfast would fit the definition of an extremist as defined by their liberal friends at the PTA. "Extremists try to stifle the free expression of all views opposed to their own." From what I have been told by his office, Gary's topic was going to be, family life in the military.
<p> The PTA brochure goes on to say, "Extremists try to purge school and public libraries of books and materials that are objectionable to them..." "extremist groups are using censorship to change educational direction and to eliminate any reference to views that differ from their own."
<p> Is this not what the liberals were attempting to do in Shreveport, Louisiana. Not to mention the fact that a group of liberals in late 92 attempted to have the Bible removed from a public school library in St. Paul/Minneapolis.
<p> "Extremists try to impose their beliefs, values and lifestyles on everyone."
<p> Remember, our liberal friends who had the books "Heather has Two Mommies", "Daddies Roommate", and "Gloria Goes to Gay Pride", on the recommend reading list for first graders in New York? Was this not an attempt to impose a belief and lifestyle on young, innocent and impressionable minds?
<p> "Extremists make irresponsible and unjust attacks on individuals and institutions and organizations that disagree with them..."
<p> Some one should tell Ted Turner that the PTA would consider him an Extremist. Ted as called Christians "bozos", as well as stating that christianity is a religion for loosers.
<p> "Extremists believe in absolutes."
<br> The PTA would do well to be sure that our kids are being taught absolutes such as, you rob a bank and get caught, you are absolutely going to jail.
<p> Read carefully this, the opening paragraph of the brochure produced by the PTA. "America's educational system is coming under special attack by many extremists. They are trying to change education by controlling what students read and study and to shape our schools into a place for inculcating youth with their political, social and religious views. many extremists oppose public education. Some even wish to destroy the public school system and to replace it with a private system controlled by them."
<p> "Be sure that only PTA members in good standings are allowed to vote at PTA meetings."
<p> Who decides whether are not you are in good standings. If you oppose them on something, does this put you in bad standing? Sounds like a pretty harsh statement for people that are supposedly so accepting of everyone and everything.
<p> If you don't believe me on this one, write or call the PTA National Headquarters in Chicago, Illinois and request your own copy of National PTA'S Guide to EXTREMISM.

</DOC>