
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT02-B11-303</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000618-B045-128</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://res2.resnet.upenn.edu:80/cis590/reading.030.html 130.91.195.242 19970122054450 text/html 18109
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wed, 22 Jan 1997 05:44:52 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 17937
Last-modified: Tue, 22 Nov 1994 06:31:11 GMT
</DOCHDR>
testimony by Steve Walker on Export controls <p>

law to proceed.  The file name of the PEM programs contained in
the "READ ME" file is changed frequently to force the anonymous
user to read the export control caution.  We also installed
filters that automatically refuse requests that are clearly
coming from outside the U.S. or Canada.  But we know that those
filters cannot stop inquiries from foreign sources that have
accounts in the U.S.  To the best of our knowledge, our approach
is as sound as many that others are using and better than most. <p>

Before we put the system on line, though, we sought the approval
of the Department of State and the National Security Agency.
Initially we got acknowledgements to our phone calls describing
our problem and proposed solution.  We were told orally at one
time that because the PEM software was "free," it was permissible
to proceed this way, implying that if we charged for it, somehow
this process would not be approved.  But as we began to seek
official approval for this process, we received fewer and fewer
responses.  Our inquiries finally took the form of:  "Unless you
tell us not to do this, this is how we intend to proceed." On
June 1, 1993, we put the anonymous FTP process on line, and our
system has responded to hundreds of requests.  We have never
received acknowledgement that the process is either acceptable or
unacceptable to the Government despite being told on several
occasions that we would receive such acknowledgement. <p>

The above described process is patterned after a similar process
that takes place now in software retail stores.  Programs for
sale over the counter containing DES or similar export controlled
software are supposed to be marked with explicit and obvious
labels telling the buyer that these products cannot be taken from
the U.S. or Canada.  The burden of complying with the export laws
rests entirely with the buyer since the seller has no
responsibility to ascertain whether the buyer is a U.S. or
Canadian citizen.  One has to wonder if these prominent notices,
rather than advising buyers to beware, do not guide the foreign
buyer, who is not concerned with violating U.S. export laws,
directly to the product he or she wishes to buy. <p>

A second situation of interest involves a potential major
customer of PEM, the British Ministry of Defence (MoD).  For
several years, TIS has been discussing PEM with officials in the
MoD for use with unclassified information among MoD users and
their industrial suppliers.  TIS has a perfectly good solution to
MoD's problems and could have had it running there years ago.
Unfortunately, we cannot export PEM even to the British MoD
because PEM uses the DES and RSA encryption algorithms. <p>

Last year, the SPA succeeded in obtaining expedited export
approval for software products that use cryptography so long as
the key length is 40 bits or less.  While this was a significant
accomplishment, since it was the first time that any cryptography
for confidentiality was given general export approval, the
victory was short lived.  Forty-bit key algorithms can be
exhaustively searched in very short times.  If a device could be
built to exhaustively search a 56-bit key space (DES) in 176
years, it would take less than 1 day to search a 40-bit key
space.  Foreign customers for U.S. products who already have DES
readily available laughed at the 40-bit U.S. restriction.  TIS
produced a 40-bit version of Trusted Mail and obtained the
expedited Department of State export approval but to date has
been unable to find a foreign (or domestic) customer willing to
accept the weak 40-bit key length. <p>

After spending much energy searching for plausible solutions to
this problem, our newly formed Trusted Information Systems (UK)
Limited office has contracted with British scientists to
implement a new UK version of PEM based on the same international
specifications and using DES and RSA algorithms that are already
available in the UK.  In a very real sense, this situation
demonstrates that the only accomplishment of U.S. export control
restrictions is the export of U.S. jobs. <p>

To make matters even worse (in the job export sense, at least),
because of provisions in the UK export laws, it appears that we
can import the UK product for sale in the U.S., something we
would never be able to do in reverse. <p>

These examples of problems with the export control process or its
consequences are typical of the situations many U.S. companies
find as they attempt to enter the world of software cryptography. <p>

Industrywide Experiences <p>

Some companies do try to compete and offer excellent DES-based
products in the U.S.  But because of the export restrictions,
they must develop weaker versions for export if they wish to
pursue foreign markets.  Many companies forgo the business rather
than spend extra money to develop another inferior product that
cannot compete with products widely available in the market. <p>

The Government already has a measure of lost sales and
dissatisfied customers in the number of State Department/NSA
export license applications denied, modified, or withdrawn.
However, it is impossible to estimate accurately the full extent
of lost sales.  Many potential customers know that U.S. companies
cannot meet their demand and thus no longer inquire.  Conversely,
some companies have given up even trying to get export approvals
for DES to meet customer demand. <p>

Gauging the extent of economic harm to companies is an inherently
difficult task because most companies do not want to reveal that
sort of information.  Consequently, there exists only anecdotal
information.  But the accumulation of anecdotal information
collected by the SPA paints a picture of three ways in which the
export controls on cryptographic products are hurting American
high-tech industry. <p>

(1)  First, for many data security companies, every sale is
vital, and the loss of contracts smaller than $1 million can
often mean the difference between life and death for these
companies.  The confusion and uncertainty associated with export
controls on encryption generate severe problems for small firms,
but not as severe as the loss of business they suffer from anti-
competitive export controls.  Examples abound: <p>

o    One U.S. company reported loss of revenues equal to a
          third of its current total revenues because export
          controls on DES-based encryption closed off a market
          when its customer, a foreign government, privatized the
          function for which the encryption was used, and the
          U.S. company was not permitted to sell to the private
          foreign firm.  The company estimates it loses millions
          of dollars a year because it receives substantial
          orders every month from various European customers but
          cannot fill them because of export controls. <p>

o    One small firm could not sell to a European company
          because that company sold to clients other than
          financial institutions (for which export controls grant
          an exception).  Later, the software firm received
          reports of sales of pirated copies of its software.
          This constituted a loss of a $400,000 contract for the
          small U.S. software firm. <p>

o    Because of existing export restrictions, an American
          company recently found itself unable to export a mass
          market software program that provided encryption using
          Canadian technology based on a Japanese algorithm.  Yet
          other European and Japanese companies are selling
          competing products worldwide using the same Canadian
          technology. <p>

o    An SPA member's product manager in Europe reported the
          likely loss of at least 50% of its business among
          European financial institutions, defense industries,
          telecommunications companies, and government agencies
          if present restrictions on key size are not lifted. <p>

o    Yet another SPA member company reported the potential
          loss of a substantial portion of its international
          business if it cannot commit to provide DES in its
          programs. <p>

o    A German firm that opened a subsidiary in the U.S.
          sought a single source encryption software product for
          both its German and U.S. sites.  A U.S. data security
          firm that bid for the contract lost the business
          because U.S. export controls required that the German
          firm would have to wait approximately six months while
          a license was processed to sell them software with
          encryption for foreign application.  The license could
          only be for one to three years, the three year license
          being more expensive.  Consequently, the German firm
          ended up purchasing a DES-based system from another
          German company, and the U.S. firm lost the business. <p>

o    A foreign government selected one software company's
          data security product as that government's security
          standard.  The company's application to export the DES
          version was denied, and as a consequence the order was
          lost.  This cost the company a $400,000 order and
          untold millions in future business. <p>

(2)  Second, multinational corporations (MNCs) are a prime source
of business in the expanding international market for encryption
products.  Many U.S.-based firms have foreign subsidiaries or
operations that do not meet export requirements.  While U.S.
products may be competitive in the U.S., many MNCs obtain from
foreign sources encryption systems that will be compatible with
the company's worldwide operations.  Moreover, foreign MNCs
cannot rely on the availability of U.S. products and have been
known to import foreign cryptography for use in their U.S.
operations. <p>

o    One U.S. firm reports the loss of business from foreign
          MNCs that will not integrate the company's products
          into their U.S. operations because of the export
          restrictions that would prevent them from being
          compatible with their domestic operations. <p>

o    The Computer Business Equipment Manufacturers
          Association reports that one of its members was denied
          an export license and lost a $60 million sale of
          network controllers and software for encryption of
          financial transactions when the Western European
          customer could not ensure that encryption would be
          limited to financial transactions. <p>

(3)  Third, encryption systems are frequently sold as a component
of a larger system.  These "leveraged" sales offer encryption as
a vital component of a broad system.  Yet the encryption feature
is the primary feature for determining exportability.  Because of
the export restrictions, U.S. firms are losing the business not
just for the encryption product but for the entire system because
of the restrictions on one component of it. <p>

o    One data security firm has estimated that export
          restrictions constrain its market opportunities by two-
          thirds.  Despite its superior system, it has been
          unable to respond to requests from NATO, the Swedish
          PTT, and British telecommunications companies because
          it cannot export the encryption they demand.  This has
          cost the company millions in foregone business. <p>

o    One major computer company lost two sales in Western
          Europe within the last 12 months totaling approximately
          $80 million because the file and data encryption in the
          integrated system was not exportable. <p>

One possible solution to the problem of export controls may be
for U.S. companies to relocate overseas.  Some U.S. firms have
considered moving their operations overseas and developing their
technology there to avoid U.S. export restrictions.  Thus, when a
U.S. company with technology that is clearly in demand is kept
from exporting that technology, it may be forced to export jobs
instead. <p>

HOW ARE U.S. CITIZENS AND BUSINESSES BEING AFFECTED BY ALL THIS? <p>

The answer to this question is painfully simple.  When U.S.
industry forgoes the opportunity to produce products that
integrate good security practices, such as cryptography, into
their products because they cannot export those products to their
overseas markets, U.S. users (individuals, companies, and
Government agencies) are denied access to the basic tools they
need to protect their own sensitive information.  This is where
the greatest frustration sets in. <p>

The U.S. Government established export controls in order to keep
good quality cryptography from proliferating outside the U.S.
The result has been exactly the opposite effect.  Good quality
cryptography is now available everywhere in the world including
the U.S.  But U.S. customers cannot buy it integrated into the
information system products they normally use because U.S. export
laws discourage U.S. suppliers from developing such products. <p>

We seem caught in a vicious circle that appears to make sense
only to those who do not want to see good quality cryptography
used anywhere. <p>

WHAT EFFECT WILL CLIPPER HAVE? <p>

In the midst of all of this, on April 16, 1993, the President
announced the Clipper initiative to ensure the public's right to
privacy while allowing law enforcement to conduct lawful
wiretaps. <p>

The principal concern of many with Clipper is the potential it
has for violating the privacy of citizens.  In his April 16
announcement, the President stated that "The Administration is
committed to policies that protect all Americans' right to
privacy while also protecting them from those who break the law."
It would appear that the only way both aspects of this policy can
be carried out is if the individual's right to privacy is
superseded by the Government's right to listen in whenever the
Government chooses.  Many people fear that this isn't much of a
right to privacy. <p>

There are many other concerns that have been expressed about the
Administration's Clipper Initiative and the negative aspects of
key escrow.  But with respect to the issue of export restrictions
on software products, Clipper represents primarily a distraction
only serving to cloud the issues.  Unless Clipper is made
mandatory, its requirement to use hardware and its key escrow
provisions will cause it to have little impact on the software
market.  No one will willingly give up the convenience of
integrated software encryption for an expensive hardware box that
will let the Government listen in. <p>

The international aspects of Clipper are not at all thought out.
Even if Clipper were exportable, the fact that the U.S.
Government will hold the keys and not share them with other
governments ensures that this will be no more successful overseas
than the 40-bit key length "solution." <p>

Clipper is a major diversion that does not solve any of the
problems discussed above. <p>

WHAT CAN BE DONE? <p>

Many Calls for Action <p>

Many people have been clamoring about the need to relax export
controls on encryption for years.  The National Research Council
has recently issued four reports expressing serious concern in
this area (Attachment 3). <p>

The computer industry has been complaining ever more loudly for
ten years. <p>

The Congressionally chartered Computer System Security and
Privacy Advisory Board has called for a national review of these
issues involving Government (civilian, law enforcement, and
national security interests) and industry (users and vendors).
The Advisory Board passed resolutions on the need for a national
review and expressing serious concerns about the Clipper
Initiative (Attachment 4). <p>

The Administration has formed an Interagency Review at the
request of the President to look at all aspects of the
cryptography issue including export control.  This review is the
highest level investigation of this problem to date.  Its report
is due out any time, within days or weeks.  Unfortunately, the
review is being conducted from behind closed doors with the only
public input coming through the auspices of the Advisory Board
and such industry groups as the Digital Privacy and Security
Working Group. <p>

Since the Interagency review began with the Clipper announcement
and is being conducted by Government officials who are heavily
committed to Clipper, it is unlikely that its results will assist
business by easing the software cryptography export control
constraints. <p>

President Clinton, in commenting on the North American Free Trade
Agreement, was quoted by the Washington Post, September 16, 1993,
as saying: <p>

I'm telling you folks, we cannot repeal the force that is
     driving the world economy together.  We can run away from it
     and get beat by it, or we can embrace it, do what we have to
     do and win with it. <p>

If only those who control cryptographic exports understood this. <p>

On September 30, the President announced a significant relaxation
of the export control rules for high performance computer
technology.  It would be good if some of that change could affect
the cryptography export area, but the present export position is
so well entrenched, it is unlikely there will be much change from
the Executive Branch. <p>

The Congress Must Act Now! <p>

The only hope for a recognition of the counterproductive nature
of this situation is in the Congress.  No other organization has
the breadth of constituencies to allow an honest look at all the
concerns and the authority to come to a definitive resolution on
the issue. <p>

We need to recognize that the U.S. public has a right to a
reasonable level of protection for its sensitive information.
Enabling that right through allowing the export of good quality <p>

</DOC>