
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B32-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000323-B023-347</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ec25.html 205.156.212.5 19970114221339 text/html 53576
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Tuesday, 14-Jan-97 22:10:52 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:46:40 GMT
Content-length: 53389
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ec25.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
INTELLIGENT SOFTWARE STRATEGIES via NewsNet <BR>
January 1990<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>*** MARKET ANALYSIS ***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>WHERE DOES THE U.S. EXPERT SYSTEMS MARKET STAND NOW?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(5678 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*** PREDICTIONS ***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>WHAT WILL HAPPEN IN 1990</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2397 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>*** TRENDS AND NEWS BRIEFS ***</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>Arthur Andersen Consulting and Inference Corp. Sign an Agreement</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(130 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>Ask Dan, Now Andrew Tobia$' Tax Cut</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(187 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
INTELLIGENT SOFTWARE STRATEGIES via NewsNet
January 1990

WHERE DOES THE U.S. EXPERT SYSTEMS MARKET STAND NOW?

     Once again we have decided to begin the year by trying to
provide our readers with an overview of what happened during the
past year and then to project what we think will happen in the
year ahead.
     As in the past two years, we have used a less than scientific
methodology.  We have asked vendors to give us information on
their sales, their customers, their number of employees, and the
applications they believe their products are being used for.  We
have talked with selected companies that are using expert systems
and asked them what they used in 1989 and what they plan to do in
1990.  We have checked notes that we took in conversations during
the past year, called a few people to ask discreet questions, and
checked the various documents that try to estimate the size of the
market, report companies sales, etc.  Then we put all the data
together and massaged it until it seemed to be more or less
consistent. We don't believe that any specific number is correct,
but we are confident that the overall picture is reasonably
correct. (When we obtained more specific information about
numbers we used in the past, we usually found that we erred by
being a little high.)
     We are late with this issue in large part because many
vendors who were quick to cooperate in the past were very
reluctant to do so this year. This partly reflects the fact that
the companies are increasingly dominated by marketing people
rather than technical people.  And,  it partly reflects the fact
that 1989 was a worse year for several vendors than they had
expected.
     We have promised anonymity to our sources  in the process of
gathering our data, so we will not discuss very many specific
numbers.  Instead, we will simply estimate the overall size of
each niche, and the relative position we believe the major players
occupy.

The Expert System Market in 1989 and in 1990:  An Overview

     Overall, we believe that the expert systems market enters
1990 in the best shape its been in during the last three years.
Broadly speaking, there are two aspects to the market.  There are
the companies that buy expert systems products and develop expert
systems to accomplish their corporate goals, and there are the
expert systems vendors: companies that sell hardware and software
to help people develop expert systems.

The Users

     The companies that buy and use expert systems products have
been steadily growing more confident during the last three years.
They have purchased expert systems products; they have built a few
systems; they have found that the technology works.  Their MIS
folks have been skeptical (most still are), but as new products
that work on mainframes have been introduced and as more people
learned about the practical details of expert systems development,
the companies have systematically increased their commitment.
     We currently estimate that the expert systems are being used
by the following industries in the following proportions:
     Manufacturing                           34%
     Defense and other governmental agencies 24%
     Finance                                 18%
     Other business and industry             11%
     Education                                8%
     Corporate R&D                            5%
     Our sample is relatively small, and the confusion about how
to classify certain applications is so great, that these numbers
must be considered only approximate. Even within categories there
are big differences. Computer manufacturers have been particularly
active in expert systems development and we have included them in
manufacturing.  Within the financial industry, insurance companies
are very active, brokerage firms are active, and banks are still
only mildly active. In both finance and manufacturing, we have
avoided trying to determine whether the expert systems
applications were actually related to core business functions, or
were used for generic overhead functions. (An expert system used
to manage a chip fabrication production line would perform a core
business function; a system used by the same company to assist
managers in analyzing personnel problems would perform an
overhead function.)
     Industries that fall into the "other business and industry
category that have a considerable interest in expert systems
include transportation, energy, and communications. There is also
a rising interest among retailers.
     In 1988, successful expert systems applications reached the
point where anyone really interested could convince themselves
that the technology worked and was here to stay.  There are now
several hundred working, mid-sized to large strategic applications
and several thousand small to mid-sized systems that are
accomplishing more modest tasks (like help desks and equipment
troubleshooting).  Nineteen eighty-nine saw the introduction of
the first large multi-user expert system, a trend that will
accelerate rapidly in 1990 as systems developed in 1989 are
fielded.
     Nineteen eighty-nine was the year that companies began to
standardize on the tools they would use to integrate expert
systems technology throughout their organizations. It was also the
year that companies began to worry about systematic methodologies
they could use to train their programmers to identify and develop
expert systems.

The Vendors

     On the other hand, the ranks of expert systems tool vendors
were thinned in 1987 and 1988.  Several companies went out of
business, while others realized their strategies were not working
and began re-sizing and re-coding in an effort to survive.  These
were the years that the Lisp vendors realized that only a very few
companies were going to want to buy their tools.
     In 1989, mainframe tools triumphed.  Vendors that hadn't
thought you could run expert systems on mainframes suddenly
decided to develop a mainframe version, while the companies that
had focused on mainframes all along did very well.
     From the perspective of both the users and the vendors who
are now correctly positioned, 1990 will be a good year.  The
ramp-up for corporate-wide use of expert systems is just
beginning, however, and 1991 and 1992 promise to be even better.

Who Sold What

     We'll consider what happened in 1989 by first considering
what happened within various niches, and then we'll try to pull it
all together.

Hardware Companies

     While Lisp machine, language, and most tool vendors went
through a tough time during the last three years, the major
hardware vendors who are selling equipment to the companies that
are actually using expert systems have been doing OK. The
conventional hardware vendors enjoyed significant hardware sales
(which they attribute to expert systems) and they expect more in
the years ahead. Indeed, given how relatively slow hardware sales
have been in the last two years, conventional hardware vendors
such as IBM, DEC, and Sun now see expert systems as one of the
more promising ways to sell more hardware in the 90s.
     We expect that the hardware being used primarily for expert
systems development and implementation is being sold by the
following vendors in roughly the following proportions:
     Various PCs running MS-DOS (IBM and clone makers) 20%
     Macintoshes (most equipped with TI or Symbolics    5%
          Lisp chips)
     PCs and Unix workstations running Unix            15%
     DEC hardware running VMS                          15%
     IBM mainframes running MVS                        15%
     Lisp workstations from Symbolics and Texas        20%
          Instruments
     Other                                             10%
     Some of the hardware being used may have already been in
place (e.g. the mainframes) but most companies have or will be
acquiring new hardware as they continue to expand their expert
systems development efforts, and if present trends hold up, they
should be acquiring them from the companies listed above.
     The Lisp workstation figure looks high at 20%, we believe
most of those workstations were purchased before 1989 and that the
use of Lisp workstations will decline steadily over the next two
to three years.
     We think that some companies (including the military, NASA,
and the aerospace companies that service them) will continue to
acquire Lisp workstations for high-end applications, but we
predict that most of the companies using Lisp-based software will
begin running Lisp on a Lisp co-processor or on DEC hardware. (The
military will probably move toward Lisp-chips embedded in other
hardware.)
     SUN sold about 60% of the Unix workstations being used for
expert systems development.  SUN claims that it derives about 5%
of its revenues from the AI market and that AI is its second
largest market in Europe.
     In 1989 companies began deploying expert systems on
mainframes so multiple users could access the systems
simultaneously.  We expect that multi-user applications will
expand rapidly in the next few years, and that the overall use of
mainframes will increase accordingly.
     No companies reported applications running in OS/2, but we
expect that that is a result of our sample size.  In any case, we
believe this will change in the next few years as OS/2 begins to
replace DOS at more companies.

Language Vendors

     Some high-end users are working directly in Lisp on Lisp
machines, on DEC hardware, on Unix workstations, and on
Macintoshes equipped with Lisp co-processors.  In addition, anyone
who is using a Lisp-based expert systems building tool needs to
have Lisp resident on their hardware. A few people in the U.S. are
still experimenting with Prolog.  Thus, there is a continuing
niche for symbolic l   guage vendors.
     The dominant commercial vendor is Lucid, whose Lisp is on
most commercial platforms. (A new fast version of Lucid Lisp was
just announced for DEC hardware, adding DEC to the already
impressive list of hardware vendors supporting Lucid, including
IBM, Sun, HP, Apollo, and NCR.) In addition, KEE, the best selling
Lisp tool, is written in Lucid.  Clearly, Lucid is going to
survive.
     Lisp  is used extensively in schools.  However, much of it is
Gold Hill's Golden Common Lisp.  So, Gold Hill can also survive by
selling Lisp and tools to the university market. Franz Lisp,
Quintus Prolog, and Arity Prolog are all still selling
interpreters and compilers as well. None of these companies has
become as large as its founders had hoped, but they all seem to
have found some level at which they can survive.
     Lisp will not go away.  It is a powerful and very flexible
language that is just right for rapidly prototyping very large and
complex systems. Several different companies in 1989 went out of
their way to tell us that they expect to be doing more work in
Lisp in the future.  The latest versions of Lisp are much faster
and easier to manage than the versions of only a few years ago. As
more and more students move from school, where they learned Lisp,
into companies, Lisp will grow slowly and continue to occupy a
highly specialized niche. (The same is also true, to a much lesser
degree, of Prolog).

Tool Vendors

     The expert systems tool market changed quite a bit in 1989
and some of the changes caught us off guard:

Small PC/Mac Tool Vendors

     We define small PC and Mac tools as tools that sell for from
$100 to about $1000.
     Many small PC vendors have disappeared in the last two years.
Of those that remain, Paperback Software's VP-Expert occupies an
overwhelmingly dominant position.  VP-Expert has now sold some
60,000 copies, which means it doubled its sales in 1989.  A large
portion of the VP-Expert sales went to schools, but VP-Expert is
also the most popular small PC tool in the corporate environment.
     As we write this, the trial between Paperback Software and
Lotus over VP-Planners's alleged infringement of VP-Planner on
Lotus 1-2-3's interface is taking place. Assuming Paperback
Software survives this challenge and continues to improve
VP-Expert, it should be able to hold on to the low end of the
expert systems tool market for the foreseeable future.
     Information Builders' Level5 is clearly the second
best-selling small PC tool, and it certainly sold several thousand
units.
     We always have trouble classifying Level5.  The PC version is
priced as a small tool and it has about the same capabilities as
most of the small tools -- rules and backward chaining -- but it
is associated with Focus and there are versions of the tool
running on DEC machines and on IBM mainframes. In addition, Level5
has features that facilitate its integration and assure easy
database access. Where Paperback Software is really mass marketing
VP-Expert, we expect that most of Information Builders' sales are
to companies who acquire site licenses.
     Other tools that companies are using to develop small systems
include 1st-Class, Exsys, KnolwedgePro from Knowledge Garden, and
Crystal from Intelligent Environments.  TI's Personal Consultant
Easy is still being used, although it is less common now than a
year ago.
     With the exception of VP-Expert, which is priced and sold as
a mass-market commodity (and Level5, which we'll consider later
when we consider workstation and mainframe vendors), the other
small tool vendors are either hurting or face the prospect of very
modest growth.
     Figure 1 shows our estimates of the small PC tool sales in
1987, 1988, and 1989 (see printed version of this issue, available
from Cutter Information Corp.; (800) 888-8939, (617) 648-8700).
Last year we projected that small tool vendors would sell 70,000
units in 1989. Obviously the small tool market has not grown as
fast as we expected.
     Paperback Software sold the great majority of units sold in
1989.  The income the small tools market received was lower than
expected both because fewer units were sold and because VP-Expert
sells for only $249 (often discounted to much less).
     We expect that Paperback Software, having the momentum it
has, will continue to sell well in 1990, but we anticipate that
the overall market for small tools will be about the same in 1990
as 1989.  Educational institutions and individuals who want to
experiment with expert systems account for most of the sales.
These sales will continue, but they're probably not going to
experience much growth in the coming year.
     Another factor that limited the growth of the market for
small tools was the relative lack of Macintosh sales. Human
Intellect Systems' Instant Expert ($69) is probably the best
selling tool for the Macintosh.  Information Builders introduced a
Mac version of Level5 in 1989, but apparently there isn't much of
a market for expert systems tools among Mac users.
     We expect that some of the smaller tool vendors will merge
with other companies during 1990.  Some of these tools would
provide the right vertical marketing company with a great
foundation on which to develop a series of problem- or
application-specific tools.  A training company could take one of
these tools, modify its interface, and create a whole series of
highly specific tools to help trainers (who are generally not
programmers) develop manuals, small equipment repair aids, etc.
     We keep expecting small, reasonably priced PC tools that are
specialized for specific applications (like manual development, or
small help desks, etc.) to appear.  So far they haven't.  Thus,
the people using the small PC tools are mostly "Lotus-literate
programmers or students who are using the tools as a way to learn
about expert systems technology or are using them to develop small
applications.
     In our opinion, there are real opportunities for the small
tools that help non-programmers accomplish specific tasks. The
current crop of tools, including VP-Expert, are still too
difficult to use to attract this audience.  Hence, as companies
standardize, they will increasingly use tools they acquired under
site licenses, and the market for the various standalone, generic
small PC tools will decrease.

Mid-Sized, PC/Workstation Tool Vendors

     We define these tools as products that run on PCs, Unix
workstations (i.e. SUN), or DEC hardware. These tools range in
price from $2,500 to $25,000, but most sell for between $5,000 and
$8,000.
     Last year we assumed that 4,500 mid-sized PC/workstation
tools were sold in 1988.  We realize now that some of the units we
included in that figure were, in fact, European sales.  We now
estimate that the total PC/workstation tools sold in the U.S. in
1988 actually totalled some 3,500 units, and the sales income
generated by mid-sized tool sales was $23.5 million.
     We projected that 1989 mid-sized tool sales would climb to
7,000 units.  We now believe that, in fact, there were about 4,500
mid-sized tools sold in 1989. We believe the vendors made about
$30 million on such sales. Clearly the market didn't grow as fast
as we projected.
     What is much more interesting is who sold the most mid-sized
tools in 1989 -- Aion Corp.  We did not anticipate this, nor did
the managers to whom we talked in early 1989 about their plans for
the year. Apparently companies decided to standardize in 1989,
and, having made that decision, they decided to buy PC tools that
were compatible with the mainframe tools they intended to buy.
Since many companies chose Aion's ADS for their mainframe tool in
1989, they also chose to cut site licenses with Aion. In
considering who sold the most units, we only considered
developmental versions of tools.  Aion led in developmental
versions sold, but they also sold a phenomenal number of delivery
or runtime licenses, mostly in conjunction with site licenses.  A
telling bit of information:  the Texas Instruments instructors at
TI's Information Systems Center, who formerly taught internal
courses on how to use Personal Consultant Plus, now teach TIers
how to use the PC version of Aion's ADS.
     Other important vendors selling in this market include Neuron
Data (Nexpert Object), AI Corp (KBMS), Software A&E (KES II),
Inference Corp. (ART/IM), and Information Builders Inc. (Level5
for the VAX).  AI Corp introduced a DOS version of KBMS in
mid-1989.  We expect that the same logic (i.e. that companies that
have standardized on a mainframe tool will buy PC versions of the
same tool) will hold in 1990 and that companies choosing the
mainframe version of KBMS will also push KBMS PC sales up rapidly.
Inference Corp.'s Unix workstation version of ART/IM enjoyed
significant sales in 1989, presumably because companies who are
considering using ART on the mainframe want to explore its
potential.
     Information Builders Inc. didn't play a large role in the
mid-sized tool market in 1989, but it will probably play a larger
role in 1990. In mid-1990, Information Builders is set to
introduce their new tool, Level5 Object.  Unlike Level5, which is
a backward-chaining simple rule tool, Level5 Object will be a
powerful hybrid tool with high quality user and developer
graphics. The PC version will to be priced at around $1,000. If
the tool is as good as the demos and sells for $1,000, it will set
a new price/value standard for the industry and put both the small
PC vendors and most of the mid-sized tool vendors under
considerable pressure.
     In effect, the mid-sized/workstation niche, as an independent
market niche, is disappearing (at least in the U.S.). Companies
clearly want to field expert systems on mainframes and they are
committing to mainframe companies. Once committed, they are using
the PC tools sold by those companies rather than buying mid-sized
tools from vendors specializing in selling tools for $5,000 to
$8,000.
     The exceptions, at the moment, are companies that want to
develop and field their applications on VAX hardware. We expect
that Nexpert Object may still be the best-selling mid-sized tool
for DEC hardware, but it must be getting some competition from
DEC's VAX Decision Expert and will soon get some more from DEC's
Epitool.  That's an important exception, of course, because DEC
equipment is being widely used in manufacturing --  the industry
that is buying most of the expert systems software at the moment.

     AI Corp has just introduced a DEC version of KBMS and Aion
has committed to developing a DEC version in the future. Thus, at
some point in the near future, even those operating on DEC
hardware will have the option of buying tools that not only run on
a DEC, but on an IBM as well.
     Some new vendors entered the mid-sized market in 1989.  The
most interesting tool is probably Meta Knowledge's Kappa.  Still,
given what we have just said, new vendors that start out on the PC
and then try to add platforms until they finally get a mainframe
version are going to have a very hard time.
     It's probably too late for any small to mid-sized company to
try to introduce a new generic tool.  The market wants
integration, and there are some good vendors in the market that
are offering exactly that. It will be very hard for a small
company to compete by offering a tool that just runs on a single
platform when there are vendors that have tools running on PCs,
Unix workstations, VAX machines, and IBM mainframes.
     We expect that the mid-sized tool market will grow modestly
in 1989.  With the benefit of hindsight, we expect that most of
the mid-sized sales will be to companies that have standardized on
a mainframe tool and then buy PC or DEC versions of that tool to
use in training and in the development of expert systems.

Mainframe Tool Vendors

     The mainframe vendors sold about 175 units and made $11
million on tool sales in 1988.  We projected that they would sell
400 units and make $25 million in 1989.  In fact, we believe they
sold about 237 units and made about $22 million selling mainframe
tools.
     We just described the sharp increase in market share that
Aion achieved in the PC/workstation market. We expect that in 1990
the PC versions of Level5 Object and KBMS will also enjoy
considerable sales.  We had not anticipated this, although clearly
we should have.  Many companies have apparently decided to go with
mainframe tools but, logically enough, they have begun by
acquiring only one or a few mainframe versions of the tool, and
then have proceeded to acquire a large number of PC versions of
the tool.  This strategy allows their developers to begin learning
about the technology and to create and test applications without
forcing the company to spend the larger amounts of money required
to make the tools available on the mainframe.
     It seems that companies are committing to mainframe delivery,
but are holding off on purchasing the software required for that
delivery until it is needed. In other words, mainframe tool sales
will lag behind the sales of the PC versions of the mainframe
tools.
     Accordingly, even though mainframe tool sales fell below what
we expected this year, we believe the mainframe tool market is in
very good shape.  We predict that mainframe tool sales will easily
reach 400 by the end of 1990, and will accelerate even faster
thereafter as companies develop the applications that require the
mainframe software for delivery.
     Clearly, the dominant mainframe tool vendor in 1989 was Aion.
Equally clear is the fact that almost everyone who is considering
buying ADS is also considering KBMS.  The fierce competition
between these two companies will continue unabated through 1990
and probably for several years thereafter.  (We will be reviewing
Aion's ADS and AI Corp's KBMS in the next issue of the
newsletter.)
     Nineteen ninety will witness the introduction of Information
Builders' Level5 Object and IBM's TIRS.  In addition, Inference
Corp. will probably play a larger role as a result of its recent
deal with Arthur Andersen Consulting (See Trends).
     In 1989, we saw the triumph of the mainframe approach to
expert systems.  From now on, with the exception of relatively
specialized vendors like Paperback Software, the Lisp vendors, the
domain-or problem-specific vendors, and perhaps one or two tools
that are very effective on DEC VAX systems, any company that does
not have a credible mainframe version of their product will not be
able to play a significant role in the expert systems tool market.
The competition in the mainframe market should be very fierce in
1990.
     IBM probably didn't make much money selling expert systems
tools in 1989, but it was very active.  In addition to continuing
to work on ESE and KnowedgeTool, they began selling IBM/KEE and,
much more important, they announced their AD/Cycle with a
knowledge-based systems component.  In the context of its AD/Cycle
announcement, IBM also announced that it will begin selling a new
hybrid tool with impressive graphics, called TIRS.  We expect TIRS
will quickly replace all three of IBM's early offerings and become
the first tool that IBM sells in any significant numbers. (That
TIRS is limited to mainframes and OS/2 machines will limit its
sales, but there are enough people who want to buy from IBM and
have been waiting for a credible tool, to guarantee that IBM will
play an increased role in the tool market in 1990.

Lisp Tool Vendors

     In 1988 the large Lisp vendors sold about 900 units and made
about $20 million on tool sales.  We projected that they would
sell 1100 units in 1989 and make about $23 million on tool sales.
In fact, we believe that 970 Lisp-based tools were sold in 1989
and that the vendors made about $22.5 million in the process.
     Last year we considered IntelliCorp's KEE, Inference Corp.'s
Lisp version of ART, and Carnegie Group's Knowledge Craft in this
category.  We placed Gold Hill Computer's GoldWorks in the
mid-sized tool category and we placed Gensym's G2 in the
domain-specific category.  This year we have included both
GoldWorks and G2 in the Lisp category. We changed because we
decided that the fact that a tool is written in Lisp is much more
important to potential clients than the hardware or the size of
the tool.  In addition to the vendors listed above, we considered
both AIT's Mercury and DEC's Epitool as part of this market.
Epitool has just been introduced in the U.S., but has significant
sales in Europe.
     Clearly IntelliCorp's KEE is still the best selling Lisp tool
and almost everyone agrees that it defines the top of the entire
expert systems market in terms of features and functionality.
Inference has switched most of its attention to selling the C
version of ART and Carnegie Group is concentrating on consulting
and on problem-specific tools.  AIT's Mercury (fast database
access) and Gensym's G2 (real-time applications) are currently
attracting buyers with specialized needs, and DEC's Epitool is
about to test the proposition that customers will buy a Lisp tool
if the programming interface makes you think you are programming
in Pascal rather than Lisp.  We expect Lisp tool sales to decline
to 900 units in 1990, and we expect the income vendors earn on
Lisp tool sales to decline accordingly.
     There is a continuing rumor that IntelliCorp will introduce a
C-based tool in 1990.  If they do introduce it within the first
half of 1990 and it is as successful as Inference Corp.'s C
version of ART, we expect that overall Lisp tool sales may decline
significantly, since, in effect, the last major Lisp tool vendor
will appear to be moving out of Lisp and will be refocusing its
sales effort on the non-Lisp tool market.  That might mean a few
more Lisp sales for some of the more specialized vendors, but it
will probably be the final blow to generic Lisp tools.  There will
continue to be a small market for problem- or
application-specific tools written in Lisp.  However, most of the
people who want to work in Lisp will probably work in the language
itself.

Problem- and Application-Specific Tool Vendors

     There were a number of domain-specific tools introduced in
1989.  Carnegie Group added Service Maintenance Planner, Text
Categorization System, and Cost & Manufacturability Guide to their
earlier diagnostic specific tool, TestBench.  TI, which also sells
TestBench, added Line Balancer, Technicians Assistant, and a
variety of airline planning and scheduling applications that it
developed in its Symbolic Spreadsheet product.  TI is eager to
tailor any of these applications to help solve any transportation
company's needs. IntelliCorp introduced KLUE.  DEC announced XSAFE
and started marketing AI WARE's CAD/Chem product. Syntelligence
sold a copy of Syntel, its tool for developing financial
applications. These products range in price from a few hundred to
one million dollars.
     Last year we estimated that 100 problem- or
application-specific tools had been sold and that the vendors had
made some $3 million.  We projected the sale of 200 units in 1989
and revenue of $6 million.  We believe that more than 200 units
were sold, but we are very unsure of the money that vendors made
in the process. For our summary calculations we take the very
unreliable figure of $6 million and project an equally unreliable
$12 million for 1990.  In most cases, these sales blend into
consulting and these figures have to be regarded as particularly
suspect.

Application Vendors

     The early vendors who tried to sell expert systems off the
shelf failed to make a go of it (although Syntelligence is still
trying).  At the moment, there are many small to mid-sized expert
systems applications being sold. Most are modest in size and very
narrowly defined.  We have not tried to estimate the number sold
or the money being made in the process. Later this year we will
publish a catalogue of expert systems for sale.  We'll try to make
a reasonable estimate of the market at that time.

Consultants and Software Houses

     Companies like Cimflex-Teknowledge and Carnegie Group have
really transformed themselves into software development shops that
specialize in expert systems development.  IntelliCorp and
Inference Corp. will probably follow in the next couple of years.
In addition, some of the small expert systems tool vendors are
making most of their money from consulting and will probably be
absorbed by software development groups in the coming year.
     Almost all of the expert systems tool vendors earn a
considerable amount of their money from expert systems consulting
(which we have tried not to count as a part of their tool
revenue).  TI, for example, is earning far more money selling
consulting services than it is selling tools.  As a general rule,
you can add 35% to 40% to the tool income of an expert systems
vendor to reflect the income that vendor is earning from
consulting. (There are only a few significant exceptions -- Neuron
Data and Aion, for example.)
     In addition, established software development groups are
doing lots of work in expert systems.  The largest is clearly
Arthur Andersen Consulting (see Trends), followed probably by
Coopers & Lybrand and Arthur D. Little.  In addition, most of the
other major software development groups are doing at least a
little work in expert systems consulting.  There are likely a
number of groups doing specialized work for the military that we
don't know about.
     We don't have any hard estimate of the money the conventional
software houses made by doing expert systems consulting or by
incorporating expert systems into their other work, but we assume
that, taken together, the figure must be over $20 million.

The Total Size of the U.S. Expert Systems Market

     Nineteen eighty-nine was a good year for users of expert
systems, but it was a confusing year for vendors. In retrospect,
1989 was part of the transition that began in 1987. The transition
was not simply away from Lisp-based tools, as some thought, but
toward tools that could be based on mainframes and hence be
simultaneously delivered to multiple users.  The C-based
standalone workstation tools had trouble this year just as the
Lisp-based tool vendors did in 1987 and 1988. The only expert
systems tool vendors who really look good right now are those that
have the same tools on all of the major platforms, including the
mainframe.
     Aion and AI Corp are in the best position.  Information
Builders Inc., Software A&E, Inference Corp. and Neuron Data are
all still in the market, but each will be playing catch-up in 1990
as they try to improve their tools capabilities and their
mainframe credentials to match the two leaders. We only expect a
couple of them to really make it.
     IBM and DEC are both limiting their tool offerings by
limiting the platforms on which their products will run, but IBM
could be a very serious contender in 1991 if TIRS turns out to be
as nice as it looks and companies really begin to shift from DOS
to OS/2 (TIRS doesn't run in DOS).
     Last year we tried to put a dollar figure on the total expert
systems market and then on the total AI market.  This year we
thought that there was too much information we didn't have, so we
decided to take a pass.
     We have calculated the total income of tool vendors in 1989
and projected it for 1990.  The numbers are presented in Table 1
(see printed version of this issue, available from Cutter
Information Corp.; (800) 888-8939, (617) 648-8700).
     We expect that the best-positioned vendors will expand their
PC/workstation sales next year and begin to get the mainframe
sales that this year's sales have, in effect, set in motion.
     If you really want information on the broader market and can
afford to pay for it, you should buy Ovum Ltd.'s new report
"Knowledge-based Systems: Markets, Suppliers and Products." ($995,
$1035 outside North America) It arrived just as we were completing
this newsletter and we examined it closely to see how Ovum's
assumptions matched our own.  We have a few disagreements; we
think they overestimate the role of Symbolics and AI Corp and
don't give enough weight to Aion and IntelliCorp.  Moreover, they
say VP-Expert sales have faded, which is clearly wrong. (It's as
if they gathered their information on the East Coast and didn't
spend enough time in Palo Alto). Ovum's figures are about twice
ours; we expect they didn't take into account the discounts the
vendors are offering and the effect of site licenses on income.
Still, we know how hard it is to come up with reasonable
information on the various parts of the AI market and this report
seems to us worth quite a bit of study if you are interested in
vendor income estimates.
     In addition to a complete analysis of the U.S. market, the
Ovum report has the best analysis we've seen of the expert systems
market in Europe.
     For more information about "Knowledge-based Systems: Markets,
Suppliers and Products," contact Cutter Information Corp., 1100
Massachusetts Avenue, Arlington, MA U.S.A., 02174; (617)648-8700,
Fax: (617)648-8707



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
INTELLIGENT SOFTWARE STRATEGIES via NewsNet
January 1990

WHAT WILL HAPPEN IN 1990

How Did We Do in 1989?

     Before we begin to make predictions for 1990, let's take a
look at what we predicted for 1989.
     1. "Lisp machine vendors and Lisp-based generic tools will
all but disappear in 1989.  Lisp-based problem- or domain-specific
tools will do better, but..."
     We said this last year and still predicted that some 1100
Lisp-based generic tools would be sold. We estimate that about 979
units were, in fact, sold.
     Although Symbolics is showing a profit, it has switched its
energy toward software and TI is maintaining a very low profile
these days.  We think we were right on this one.
     2. "C, Mac, and mainframe tools will dominate the news in
1989."
     As noted above, nothing much happened on the Mac, but C and
mainframe tools certainly dominated the news.  We'll take a mostly
right on this one.
     3. "Several new problem- and domain-specific tools will be
introduced."
     We were certainly right on this one.
     4. "The hottest subject in 1989 will be object-oriented
programming techniques.  All of the tool vendors are scrambling to
introduce or improve their capabilities.  Object-oriented
techniques make developing expert systems faster and easier.
Rule-based tools provided most of us with an introduction to
expert systems, but hybrid tools are now rapidly becoming the
standard for expert systems work."
     This was certainly correct.  ADS now has objects and
Information Builders' Level5 Object (formerly called Level5
(Release2) is in beta testing and about to be released.  We talked
to several companies about standardization during 1989 and no one
was considering a tool that didn't have (or was about to have)
objects.  Everyone now realizes that objects are necessary for
many high-end applications.
     In addition, the object-oriented conferences were very hot in
1989. Many programmers who know little or nothing about expert
systems are rushing to learn about OOP.
     5. "The Mac tools introduced in 1989 will be really
impressive and will raise the standard for what we expect for the
small PC tools."
     Human Intellect Systems Instant-Expert Plus (introduced in
1988) remained the most interesting small tool on the Mac.
Hyperpress' Intelligent Developer was interesting but needed more
work. The same goes for Logic Programming Associates' (and Quintus
Computer Systems) Flex. IBI's Level5 for the Mac is a very
professional tool, but not very exciting.  Paperback Software
failed to deliver its Mac tool, as did Gold Hill. Little's Cameo
(in Hypercard) is interesting, but not commercially available.
     The Mac is being used by Lisp programmers in conjunction with
either a TI or a Symbolics Lisp co-processor to run larger
Lisp-based tools like ART or KEE, but those are hardly small PC
tools.
     We missed on this one. So far, the Mac isn't playing a very
interesting role in the world of small expert systems.
     6. "Nexpert Object will dominate the workstation tool market
in 1989, but will probably start to face some real competition
from tools that have about the same capabilities and interface but
cost closer to $800."
     Nexpert Object no longer dominates the mid-sized workstation
tool market, Aion does.  It hasn't gotten any $800 competitors,
but it will when Level5 Object comes out at $1,000 in mid-1990.
We were wrong on this one.
     7. "The major marketing battle in 1989 will be fought between
ADS and KBMS. Aion will try to add object-oriented capabilities
while KBMS will concentrate on getting its tool to run as fast as
ADS-HPO."
     We were right on here.  Aion did add objects and AI Corp did
manage to get KBMS to run a lot faster.  And they certainly did
battle in the offices of many companies that are trying to decide
which tool to buy.
     8. "The overall market will grow slowly as companies continue
to try to sort out how to integrate expert systems techniques with
their current practices."
     We were right on this one.  Actually the market grew a little
faster than we expected because companies began to standardize and
several site licenses were sold, but we still think this
prediction accurately reflects the overall market in 1989.
     9. "Consultants and vertical market VARs will do very well,
since companies will turn to them both for assistance in training
their own personnel and for developing high-value tailored expert
systems applications with high price tags."
     We believe that we were right on this one, too.
     10. "The research community will continue to show a lot of
interest in neural nets, but there won't be very many commercial
applications."
     Right again.
     11. "Interest in and applications of natural language will be
more pronounced in 1989 than in previous years, driven primarily
by the introduction of KBMS with its Intellect interface."
     There certainly was a growing interest in natural language in
1989. Natural language vendors showed up in numbers at the AAAI
convention (IJCAI in Detroit) for the first time.
     Most of the natural language activity was incorporated in
expert systems applications or focused on front ends for
databases.  MCI International, for example, developed a system
that scans incoming messages and sorts out time-critical money
orders. They have sold the system to several banks.
     Natural language hardly begins to rival the interest in
expert systems, nor is it worth the effort for most expert systems
applications, but it is slowly and surely growing.  We'll take a
right on this one too.
     We admit that our 1989, predictions were pretty general and
rather conservative, but we're still pleased to say that we got 8
right, 1 mostly right and only 2 wrong.  Buoyed up by our success
in 1989 we have decided to be more specific and less conservative
in predicting what will happen in 1990.  We'll be really happy if
we get 75% of our 1990 predictions right.

What We Predict for 1990

     1. 1990 will be a good year for people promoting expert
systems within corporations and for the few expert systems tool
vendors who are positioned correctly.
     In spite of tight money and continued confusion about
hardware, operating systems, and networking, corporations will
invest in expert systems because they are directly related to
solving hard, strategic problems; increasing productivity; and
improving quality; all key corporate concerns.
     Fortune 500 companies will continue to standardize on tools
and buy site licenses, which will make the winning expert systems
tool vendors stronger, while eliminating the less successful
vendors from the market.
     Most corporate MIS groups are only beginning to be won over
to expert systems, so 1990 won't see really large numbers of
systems deployed or integrated in the way that DEC has.  We
believe 1991 and 1992 will be even better years, as MIS people
realize just how many problems they can ameliorate or solve with
expert systems techniques.
     In other words, the AI winter is over, the weaker vendors
have been weeded out or are dying, and the vendors who have
successful products are about to enjoy some prosperous years.  The
people within corporations who have been championing expert
systems are about to become respectable prophets, as MIS groups
slowly but surely realize that expert systems technology will be
an important key to success throughout the 1990s.
     2. The term "expert systems is about to disappear. By the end
of 1990, almost everyone will be saying"knowledge-based systems
(KBS). We certainly admit that "expert systems suggests the wrong
thing; (it refers to a specific role that only a small minority of
the systems ever played) and that "knowledge-based systems puts
the emphasis on the technology, where it belongs. (The only proper
alternative would be inference-based systems.)
     "Expert systems has held on primarily because the media have
used the term in popular articles. As the hype around expert
systems dies down (and the popular computer press focuses on OOP
and neural networks), corporate analysts and programmers will
prefer to talk about the technology using a more accurate term.
     We'll have a hard time adjusting; "expert systems just comes
tripping off our tongue, but we'll try. (We may even change the
name of the newsletter.)
     3. Throughout 1990, the main marketing news will continue to
be generated by Aion and AI Corp, although later in 1990, IBM's
TIRS will begin to give both companies some modest competition.
     By the end of 1990, Aion will be the most successful expert
systems vendor, with sales topping $30 million.
     4. Level5 Object will be very well received and will
effectively drop the price of a good, hybrid mid-sized tool to
$1,000.
     5. The Lisp-based hardware and tool vendors are still in for
a rough time.
     IntelliCorp will introduce a C version of KEE.  KEE will
remain the best of the Lisp-based tools and the preferred choice
of high-end developers, but IntelliCorp will be forced to shrink
since it is still too large for its limited niche.  Symbolics will
try to shift from hardware to software, but they will have trouble
and they too will probably also find themselves trying to shrink
their overhead.
     TI will increasingly focus on doing Lisp development in the
context of highly targeted consulting.  They will focus on
introducing a SPARC II chip with Lisp-like capabilities and then
position themselves in the Unix world.
     Gold Hill will need to shrink some more and will probably
increasingly focus on supplying Lisp software for universities.
     The Lisp companies that survive will follow TI, Teknowledge,
and Carnegie Group and become specialized software development
houses. They will de-emphasize software sales and focus on helping
clients develop strategic software applications.
     One or more of them will be purchased by larger software
houses who want to add an expert systems capability to their
portfolio of consulting capabilities.
     At least one major Japanese or European software house will
enter the U.S. market by acquiring one of the Lisp vendors to get
a foothold in sophisticated software development in the U.S.
     The use of Lisp will continue to grow throughout the decade.
The demand for Lisp-based products and consulting services during
1990, however, will be less than the supply being offered by the
various Lisp vendors.
     6. DEC and IBM will both play a steadily increasing role in
the expert systems market.  They will both continue to benefit
from the growth of expert systems-driven hardware purchases.
     DEC will play a larger role in the short run by helping
manufacturing companies develop an overall strategy for using
expert systems and integrating them throughout the company.
     IBM will play a greater role in the longer term by continuing
to work on its tool offerings until it gets a winner -- probably
in the context of their AD/Cycle.
     Both companies will continue to play a limited role in the
tool market in 1990 because both companies are still trying to use
their tools try to force companies to commit to their hardware.
Most companies, however, will insist on buying tools that run on
several different platforms, including mainframes, PCs (in DOS and
later in OS/2), VAX machines, and Unix workstations.
     7. Neural network applications will increase and you will
hear more about them as they get integrated into existing expert
systems building tools. Neural networks will still remain a
research subject and not a commercial technology throughout 1990.
     8. Object-oriented programming will continue to be a hot
topic throughout 1990.  Many programmers who know nothing of
expert systems will get excited about using C++, Object-oriented
CASE tools and Object-oriented databases. (By the middle of the
decade, C++ will be the dominant OOP language and will begin to
replace C.)
     Most of the OOP folks don't know much about expert systems.
They stress rapid prototyping but don't understand inferencing or
the use of heuristic rules. In 1991 and 1992 there will be a real
opportunity for expert systems people within corporations to help
the OOP folks develop a methodology based on what they (the expert
systems people) have learned about developing object-based
programs and managing rapid prototyping efforts.
     By 1992 or 1993, the best of the OOP tools will incorporate
some inferencing and will be positioned as CASE tools. Some of
them will probably be developed by the same vendors who are now
selling expert systems tools.
     We regard OOP as a spin-off of AI, or at least a kindred
technology, and will devote an increasing amount of attention to
it as it matures.  We haven't tried to estimate the financial size
of the OOP market in this issue, but we will take a crack at it
later in the year.
     9. Problem- and application-specific tools will continue to
be introduced.  No one tool will have a large impact because each
will be specialized for very specific niches, but they will
certainly create consulting opportunities for companies that will
increasingly consider themselves software consulting firms, as
Texas Instruments' Knowledge Engineering Group has done.
     10. While the early vendors of expert systems applications
were unsuccessful, there is a growing number of vendors, mostly
selling expert systems that run on PCs (see the Trends article on
Ask Dan) or applications that are highly specialized, such as
DuPont's Packaging Advisor or Beckman's PepPro, that are doing
quite well. The successful products all emphasize that they
perform a job well and de-emphasize the technology that underlies
the product.  No one wants to buy a tax program simply because
it's an expert system -- they want to buy a tax program that's
more powerful, flexible, and easier to use than its rivals.
     (We'll be publishing a catalogue, "Expert Systems for Sale,",
1990.  We don't expect people to buy expert systems from a
catalogue, but we want to show just how large and diverse this
specific subset of expert systems applications has become.  We
haven't tried to put any financial numbers on application sales in
this issue, but we'll come up with an estimate as we develop the
catalogue, and we predict that it will be a more impressive number
than most will expect.)
     11. The hot expert systems topic of 1990 will be a systematic
methodology.  There will still be some market for consultants and
trainers who want to talk about "What Expert Systems Are but the
most successful consultants will be those who can help companies
train conventional programmers to recognize opportunities, build
expert systems, and integrate with existing corporate systems.
     If someone develops a methodology that rests on a structured
approach to developing hybrid systems (the successor to the
top-down structured programming systems based on data flow
diagrams), corporations will beat a path to their door.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
INTELLIGENT SOFTWARE STRATEGIES via NewsNet
January 1990

Arthur Andersen Consulting and Inference Corp. Sign an Agreement

     Just as we were going to press, we received an announcement
that Inference and Arthur Andersen Consulting have signed an
agreement whereby Andersen will have access to Inference's expert
systems tools for use in its system integration business.  The
agreement also provides for Inference to assist Andersen in
application development.  Inference estimates this agreement will
produce between $5 and $10 million in revenue over the next three
years.
     This agreement will go a long way to ensure that Inference is
seen as a vendor who can supply tools that run on PCs, Unix
machines, VAX hardware, and on IBM mainframes.
     It also lends support to our contention that conventional
software consultants will want to acquire the consulting skills
that are currently possessed by companies like Inference,
IntelliCorp, and Carnegie Group.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
INTELLIGENT SOFTWARE STRATEGIES via NewsNet
January 1990

Ask Dan, Now Andrew Tobia$' Tax Cut

     For the last two years we have recommended Ask Dan, a
PC-based expert systems application that helps individuals and
small business prepare their taxes.  (We weren't alone in this --
"Business Week" rated Ask Dan #1 for two years in a row, as well.)
The important thing about this program is that it doesn't put a
lot of emphasis on being an expert system; it just does the job
better than the competing (non-expert) programs.  The interface is
really excellent -- it reproduces the IRS forms and allows you to
fill out the forms, open windows to get advice, and eventually,
print out your returns.
     For those who are interested, Ask Dan in now being
distributed as part of the Andrew Tobia$ series under the name TAX
CUT.  If you have been using Ask Dan, Tax Cut will seem completely
familiar. If you use the Tobia$ Managing Your Money software, Tax
Cut will work with the data from that program.
     Tax Cut is available from MECA Ventures, Inc. and is
available in most software stores.  List price is $79.95, but
Egghead Software has it listed for $45.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>