
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B24-93</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA053-000895-B047-332</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://isse.gmu.edu:80/students/pfarrell/nist/bsa.html 129.174.40.15 19970123200530 text/html 20779
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 20:04:15 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5.2
Last-modified: Tue, 02 Jan 1996 16:16:11 GMT
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 20595
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<title>Business Software Alliance Comments</title>
<body>
<pre>
   [Handout at Key Escrow Issues Meeting, at NIST,
   Gaithersburg, Maryland, September 6, 1995.]


   Testimony of
   Robert W. Holleyman, President, Business Software Alliance

   On The Export of Software with Encryption Capabilities

   September 6, 1995

   National Insitute of Standards and Technology
   Gaithersburg, MD


   Introduction and Summary

   My name is Robert Holleyman and I am President of the
   Business Software Alliance ("BSA"). BSA promotes the
   interests of the American software industry through its
   programs in the United States and more than 60 countries
   worldwide. Our members produce what is commonly referred to
   as "mass market" or pre-packaged software and include such
   leading companies as: Autodesk Inc., Bentley Systems, Inc.,
   Intergraph Corp., Lotus Development Corp., Microsoft Corp.,
   Novell, Inc., The Santa Cruz Operation, and Sybase, Inc.

   These companies are among America's most internationally
   competitive firms. Export sales for most of them account
   for more than one-half of revenues. Overall, the American
   software industry has a 75% worldwide market share for
   pre-packaged software. Software has been one of the fastest
   growing industries in the United States during the last 15
   years and today is larger than all but five manufacturing
   industries. Moreover, the industry has highly skilled,
   highly paid jobs.

   Unfortunately, the continued success and growth of our
   industry is directly threatened by the United States
   Government's continuing refusal to adopt realistic export
   control policies. America's software companies still are
   unable to sell worldwide software programs with encryption
   features that will provide the strong information security
   demanded by their customers.

   *Specifically, the Administration's announcement last month
   failed to provide immediate relief to software companies
   because it did nothing to liberalize export controls on
   generally available software employing non-key escrow
   encryption. Moreover, the Administration's announcement and
   the preliminary criteria set forth by NIST regarding key
   escrow encryption continue to reflect a misunderstanding of
   the market place and, if implemented in anything like their
   current form, will prevent key escrow encryption from ever
   being commercially adopted.*

   The government has come forth with government designed
   criteria focused entirely on fulfilling the government's
   desire to be able to access encrypted information. But what
   the government fails to recognize is that key escrow
   encryption approaches must be commercially desirable and
   voluntarily adopted. Computer users must want to buy
   programs with such features. America's software companies
   can't sell what users won t buy -- they have not become as
   successful as they are by trying to force their customers
   to purchase products with unwanted features. Therefore,
   unless there is market demand for key escrow encryption,
   software companies are not likely to produce programs with
   such features.

   Perhaps government officials believe that they know more
   than American industry about what computer users worldwide
   are demanding by way of information security. If that is
   so, then we must strongly disagree. We also wonder about
   the Administration's apparent decision to try and rely on
   a few companies offering specialty hardware-based key
   escrow encryption systems to "demonstrate" that they work
   and that there is a market for such systems (even if a
   limited one). Is the Administration really going to pick
   winners and losers in the computing industries when it
   comes to providing information security?

   An even more ominous interpretation of the Administration's
   recent announcements also suggests itself -- the government
   is pursing a "Son of Clipper" strategy that could lead to
   the *mandatory* use of key escrow encryption. How so?
   Clearly the government is trying to force America's
   software companies to include government sought key escrow
   features in its software as the "price" for export
   approval. Because of the companies' strong desire to
   develop and sell a single version of their programs
   worldwide, the government thus hopes to be able to have
   users abroad and in the United States use software with
   such key escrow encryption features. Even if, initially,
   the domestic use of such government approved key escrow
   encryption is only an option, it is easy to see how the
   government could then pursue legislation making its use
   mandatory and criminalizing the use of any other
   encryption. After all, at that point the government could
   argue that it was simply asking for Americans to use a
   feature in their software they already have. Yet I can
   assure you that the American software industry is not
   interested in making the installed U.S. software base
   "Clipper ready." (We also note that the government has said
   it will propose revisions to the Escrow Encryption Standard
   in line with the suggested criteria that will then cover
   electronic computer communications, not just voice
   communications!)

   In short, the Administration's "new" encryption policy
   appears to be little more than the old policy in new
   clothing. It still does not enable American software
   companies to export programs sought by their customers
   worldwide.

   Accordingly, we strongly urge the Administration to:

   +  Immediately permit the export of generally available
      software programs with non-key escrow encryption
      capabilities employing the DES algorithm or other
      algorithms at comparable strengths (56-bit key lengths)
      to maintain the American software industry's
      international competitiveness; and

   +  Permit the export of software programs employing data
      encryption and commercial key recovery systems: (1) with
      algorithms using at least 64-bit key lengths; (2) in
      which users in the U.S. or abroad are able to specify a
      key holder: (3) the key recovery system will be bound to
      the encryption function pursuant to good commercial
      practices such that the time and effort involved in
      by-passing the key recovery component or "spoofing" will
      be greater than that necessary to simply employ very
      strong (e.g. triple DES) non-key escrow encryption; (4)
      the programs themselves will not provide for multiple
      encryption; and (5) the system will identify the key
      holder without notification to the party encrypting the
      information.


   Background

   It has been three years since the U.S. Government permitted
   the export of mass market software programs with moderate
   encryption (i.e. with 40-bit keys). At that time, the
   Government committed to permit stronger encryption over
   time (i.e. to increase the key lengths) to provide adequate
   information security against commercial attacks (given
   advances in computing power) and maintain American
   companies' international competitiveness (given the
   proliferation of foreign manufactured programs with strong
   encryption). But no further export control liberalization
   occurred.

   More than a year ago, Vice President Gore agreed to study
   anew the short-run impact of existing export controls on
   the American software industry's international
   competitiveness and to reassess those controls based on the
   studies. He also called for the government to work the
   industry on exportable "key escrow encryption" systems that
   would "provide strong encryption, acceptable through users
   world wide. and address the national security needs as
   well. Key escrow encryption system can permit the use of
   very strong encryption (e.g. 128 bit keys) because the
   government will be able to obtain the keys from third party
   escrow agents in appropriate circumstances and thus be able
   to decrypt information.

   Unfortunately, during the last year American companies were
   not permitted to increase the strength of the encryption in
   their exportable programs and there was only minimal
   consultation with the software industry with regards to
   making commercial key escrow encryption systems a reality.

   On August 1 7, 1994 the Administration announced a renewed
   dialogue with industry to discuss key escrow encryption
   issues, including proposed liberalization of export
   controls for such software programs.


   The Administration's Announcement Ignores The Immediate
   Need To Liberalize Export Controls on Non-Key Escrow
   Encryption Software Programs

   The Administration's policy is silent with respect to
   permitting the use of stronger encryption in exportable
   generally available software programs. This means that
   American software companies must continue to limit the
   strength of their encryption to the 40-bit key length
   levels first proposed in 1991 and adopted in 1992.

   The failure to increase the key lengths reneges on the
   commitment made by the government at that time to regularly
   review and revise the strength of the encryption. The
   insistence on the 40-bit key length also fails to
   acknowledge that longer key lengths are the worldwide
   standard. The refusal to change this standard denies the
   existence of hundreds of foreign programs on the market
   employing DES (with 56-bits keys) and other strong
   encryption. Finally, it means that information encrypted at
   the moderate level is subject to successful attack by those
   employing commercially available resources (e.g. office
   work stations at night). Further proof was widely reported
   in the press just the other week: a French student at the
   Ecole Polytechnique "cracked" the 40-bit RSA "export
   version" security scheme used by Netscape Communications
   Corp., a company which is working hard to make the GII a
   commercial reality.

   We understand that the Department of Commerce has recently
   completed its latest study assessing the marketplace and
   the availability of foreign programs and products. We are
   confident that study confirms what our member companies'
   marketing forces have reported for some time -- growing
   availability of foreign programs and products offering
   strong security features which stand to supplant U.S.
   products if left unchecked. The White House has the study.
   The time has come to recognize reality and rectify the
   competitive disadvantage imposed on American industry.



   The Administration's Proposed Criteria Will Prevent Key
   Escrow Encryption From Ever Being Commercially Adopted

   1. The Administration Fundamentally Misunderstands the
      Marketplace.

   The Administration's "new" policy as set forth in the
   proposed criteria relies upon a government-designed
   solution intended to satisfy the government's desire to be
   able to access information. But it fails to understand the
   two reasons why computer users in the office or at home may
   want to use (and thus would be willing to buy) a commercial
   key recovery encryption system.

   First, users themselves may wish to be able to recover
   their keys easily and conveniently from someone they trust.
   A simple example will illustrate the point. When one of the
   secretaries at our counsel's law firm was let go, in a fit
   of pique she deleted six months worth of an attorney's
   files. Fortunately, the law firm was able to recover these
   files from its backup drives. But what if she had encrypted
   those files and no one else had the key? Thus, corporations
   have begun to express interest in the idea of an
   arrangement whereby the information systems manager or
   someone else in the company would hold the key. Similarly,
   among individual users, the ability to recover a key in the
   event it is lost or forgotten, coupled with possible ties
   to authentication or directory services or improved ease of
   use, could attract a number of users to a commercial key
   recovery encryption approach.

   It is important to understand, however, that users are
   really only interested in the ability to recover the keys
   to encrypted stored data -- files and such. None of our
   customers has expressed any interest in a key recovery
   system for communications. That's just not important to
   them because the key is only useful for the duration of the
   communication. Moreover, given the tremendous number of
   communications the administrative burden could be
   overwhelming.

   The second reason why users might be willing to use a key
   recovery system is the possibility of using much stronger
   encryption in programs used worldwide. Because the
   government ultimately would have access to encrypted
   information if a key recovery system was employed there
   really is no need to restrict the choice of algorithm or
   limit the key lengths. Yet the Administration's new policy
   would limit the strength of encryption keys to 64-bits when
   used with a key recovery encryption svstem..

   The greater the number of individuals at home and in
   business who employ a key recovery encryption system, the
   greater will be the government's ultimate access to
   encrypted information. But a voluntary commercial key
   recovery encryption system will be widely accepted only if
   it is a market-driven process in which people want to have
   others hold their keys. Yet the Administration's proposed
   criteria outlines a system designed for the convenience of
   the government -- not the user.

   The government contemplates "certifying" a limited number
   of key escrow encryption agents. It appears to envision
   stringent qualifications and requirements. It seems
   directed towards communications -- even though there is no
   commercial demand for key recovery systems in this area. It
   arbitrarily limits the key length size as well.
   Importantly, it fails to address the key issue of the
   ability of foreign parties to hold the keys for foreign
   users.

   Instead, it appears that the government has in mind
   imposing a telephone-based model of surveillance on all
   electronic information communications worldwide. We have
   noted that the NIST statement did say that revisions were
   being contemplated to the Escrow Encryption Standard to
   cover electronic data transmitted over computer networks
   (not just telephone networks).

   2. Criteria For A Workable Commercial Key Recovery
   Encryption System

   Let's be clear from the start -- key escrow encryption or
   key recovery encryption is not some "Holy Grail." Much as
   there is not one religion for everyone, and within any one
   religion there will always be skeptics, there are likely to
   be some computer users worldwide who will not be interested
   in letting anyone else "hold" their encryption keys. But at
   the same time, as explained above, there are several market
   driven reasons why many computer users might be interested
   in such systems. And to the extent that such systems are
   voluntarily employed within the United States and worldwide
   then we believe the U.S. Government's interests would be
   served because such systems ensure ultimate access to
   encrypted information.

   We believe commercial key recovery encryption systems that
   users would want or accept, and thus could be sold, would
   feature:

   +  A variety of encryption algorithms using at least 64-bit
      keys (and more likely much longer keys).

   +  User specification of a key holder. While users must
      have the choice of whom to give their keys, we believe
      many if not most will gravitate towards significant
      business entities as trusted third parties. Moreover, we
      believe the Administration should take steps to
      encourage -- but not require -- the formation of such
      key holders. It also is essential that foreign parties
      or entities be able to hold keys for foreign users. Yet
      the Administration' s guidelines are very vague on this
      point and seem to suggest that before this could occur
      new bilateral agreements would have to be negotiated.
      But unless and until American software companies know
      that this is possible -- and thus there is a reasonable
      prospect that foreign users will buy their programs --
      they have no incentive or reason to proceed!

   +  Binding the key recovery system to the encryption
      function pursuant to good commercial practices such that
      by-passing the key recovery component or "spoofing" the
      system will require more time and effort than would be
      involved in simply using very strong non-key escrow
      encryption (e.g. triple DES; RC2 with 128 bit key) in
      the first place.

   +  The program will not itself provide for multiple
      encryption. Thuss the system would not be designed so
      that information could be encrypted by the program
      itself more than once. Of course, no one can protect
      against the problem of "super encryption" -- the problem
      of someone encrypting information with a different non-
      key recovery system program (e.g. DES) and then using
      the program with the key recovery component.

   +  Identify the key holder without notification to the
      party encrypting the information. This could be done
      through "headers" or other technological means.

   It also should be remembered, however, that it is likely to
   take two years or so --a product cycle -- to develop and
   produce programs with commercial key recovery systems once
   the decision is made to do so. So we are really talking
   about a longer term approach -- which emphasizes yet again
   the need for immediate export control liberalization for
   non-key escrow encryption programs!


   Conclusion

   The continued delay in providing immediate relief to
   American software companies by liberalizing export controls
   on generally available software with non-key escrow
   encryption capabilities is harming the software industry.
   The Administration's inability to shake off the Clipper
   mind set is effectively precluding the adoption of
   realistic criteria for commercial key recovery encryption
   systems. Perhaps most importantly, the future of the Global
   Information Infrastructure and electronic commerce are
   being jeopardized. Instead of paving the roads, the
   Administration has left in place roadblocks on the
   Information Highway.

   The time for study is over. The time for action is now. The
   American software industry deserves the right to be able to
   compete in the world marketplace.

   Let me be clear: we are entering a new wave of computing.
   One in which consumers are demanding -- because they will
   need -- security features to be able to access and exchange
   data on a global basis. American software companies are
   presently. and arbitrarily, forced to stand on the
   sidelines as we enter this new era of computing, all
   because of outmoded restrictions which limit the ability of
   U.S. companies to sell programs abroad with greater than
   40-bit key length encryption. Nothing in the
   Administration's proposal will change this imbalance
   because the proposal does not adequately recognize that a
   key recovery system must be market driven, not government
   imposed, for it to gain popular acceptance and widespread
   utilization. By setting the bar too high, the
   Administration risks failure in satisfying its security
   objectives and, in doing so, takes the heretofore
   competitive American software industry out of its most
   important emerging market.

   It need not be this way. We urge the Administration to
   re-think its current proposal and work with the software
   industry to devise truly workable, market driven, criteria
   for exportable software programs with information security
   features.

   Thank you.

   [End]

</pre>

BÿBack to Pat's<a href="http://www.isse.gmu.edu/~pfarrell/nistmeeting.html">
NIS&T Key Escrow/Export Meeting</a> page.
<hr>
<A HREF="http://www.isse.gmu.edu/students/pfarrell/disclaimer.html"> 
PDF</a> September 8, 1995  Backto <a href="http://www.isse.gmu.edu/~pfarrell/hotlist.html">Pat's hotlist</a> Backto <a href="http://www.isse.gmu.edu/~pfarrell/index.html">Pat's homepage</a>
</body>
</HTML>
</DOC>