
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B20-63</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA005-000051-B018-98</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://lacebark.ntu.edu.au:80/j_mitroy/sid101/ipcc/syntrep.html 138.80.61.12 19970221151858 text/html 124157
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 21 Feb 1997 14:49:04 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.3
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 123984
Last-modified: Tue, 09 Jul 1996 02:26:01 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<title> IPCC Second Assessment Synthesis Report (August 1995 draft) </title>

<h3> Note to US Government Reviewers </h3>

<p>
OFFICE OF THE U. S. GLOBAL CHANGE RESEARCH PROGRAM
300 D Street, S.W., Suite 840
Washington, D.C.  20024
Phone:  (202) 651-8250/651-8240
Fax:  (202) 554-6715/554-6858
</p>	


Dear Prospective Reviewer:
<p>
The U. S. Government has received a draft for review of the IPCC Second Assessment 
Synthesis Report. Drawing from the three IPCC reports, this synthesis report is intended to 
provide an integrated and comprehensive perspective of the knowledge relevant to the 
interpretation of Article 2 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. Although 
the individual working group reports have not yet been completed, to meet the IPCC 
schedule, it is necessary that the initial review of the synthesis report occur at this time. 
This office is collating comments to be considered for the U.S. Government review and is 
not the mechanism to be used for individual reviews.  
</p>

THIS  IS A DRAFT DOCUMENT AND SHOULD NOT BE CITED OR DISTRIBUTED.  
<p>
The report includes 14 figures and several tables which could not be downloaded onto the 
Web.  While it may be somewhat difficult to review the synthesis report without approved 
versions of the Summaries for Policymakers from the three working groups, they are 
currently being revised and are not available.  However, the Synthesis report will be 
updated as these documents change.  Despite these difficulties, we believe it is important to 
participate at this stage in this review process and to comment on both the broad structure 
of the report and the detailed presentation of information.
</p>
Comments must be received by the USGCRP office by noon on September 6. Because this 
date provides for less than  a week for us to assemble and integrate the comments and send 
forth a set of U. S. Government comments, this deadline is very firm. It would be most 
helpful if comments could be sent via email to office@usgcrp.gov, or please deliver an 
electronic disc to the address above. 
<p>
Comments should be divided into general comments which should come first, and then 
specific comments. List page and line numbers for each suggestion or explanation for a 
specific working change.  If you do not have a paper copy available for referral to line 
numbers, list page and paragraph numbers so we can understand where they should be 
inserted. Please provide your name, affiliation, address, telephone and fax numbers, and 
email address with your submission. If you need a paper copy contact Ms. Sandra Vaughn-
Cooke at 202-651-8250 (fax: 202-554-6715; email office@usgcrp.gov). 
</p>

Mike MacCracken, Director, Office of the USGCRP


<p>

<pre>

DRAFT
FOR INTERNAL USE ONLY
DO NOT CITE/DISTRIBUTE

THE IPCC ASSESSMENT OF KNOWLEDGE
RELEVANT TO THE INTERPRETATION OF
ARTICLE 2 OF THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE 
CHANGE: 
A SYNTHESIS REPORT
1995


Draft Summary for Policymakers

1. Introduction

1.1 The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change recognizes that 
human activities could alter the Earth's climate. Its ultimate objective as 
expressed in its Article 2 is:

"... stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level 
that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate 
system. Such a level should be achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow 
ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change and to ensure that food 
production is not threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in 
a sustainable manner". 

1.2 A determination of what concentrations of greenhouse gases are 
"dangerous" is a policy judgement. This summary provides an assessment of 
scientific and technical information for policymakers in their consideration of 
Article 2. It is based on the IPCC reports of 1994 and 1995.

2. Is There Evidence that Human Activities are Changing the Climate? 

2.1 Human activities are causing increases in atmospheric concentrations of 
greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide and methane, and of aerosols 
(tiny airborne particles) . Greenhouse gases warm the atmosphere while 
aerosols tend to cool it. The cooling effect of aerosols is regional because of 
the regional nature of their distributions.

2.2 Comparing the observed change in the global mean temperature with model 
simulations suggests that the observed increase over the last century (0.3 C - 
0.6 C) is unlikely to be entirely due to natural causes and that a pattern of 
climatic response to human activities is identifiable in the climatological record. 
It is more difficult to determine whether global precipitation has changed; 
increases are evident in some places but not in others. On a global scale, there 
is little evidence of sustained trends in variability or extremes of weather events 
such as hurricanes and floods. On regional scales, there is clear evidence of 
changes in them.

3. How is Climate Projected to Change in the Absence of Mitigation Policies? 

3.1 Based on inputs such as population, economic growth, land-use, 
technological change and energy availability, and assuming no climate change 
policies, the IPCC developed a range of emissions scenarios - the so-called 
IPCC IS 92 scenarios. For these scenarios, carbon dioxide emissions in the 
year 2100 are projected to be in the range of about 6 GtC per year (for low 
population projections), similar to current emissions, to as much as 36 GtC per 
year. Cumulative emissions of carbon dioxide for the same scenarios for the 
period 1990-2100 would range from 700 to 2080 GtC (compared to 240 GtC 
for 1860-1994). The wide range in the projections reflects different prevailing 
views on population and economic growths and other factors. 

3.2 Climate models, using the IS 92 scenarios, project an increase in the global 
mean temperature of 0.8 C to 3.5 C by 2100, the range in the projections 
arising from uncertainties in climate processes and future greenhouse gas 
emissions. (The range would be 0.8 C-4.6 C if aerosols were excluded in the 
models.) However, only 50-70% of the eventual equilibrium temperature 
change would have been realized by that time. These temperature changes are 
expected to be accompanied by changes in the regional and temporal patterns 
and intensity of rainfall (increased tendency for both floods and droughts) and, 
by the year 2100, an increase in the global mean sea-level of 0.1 to 0.8 m (0.1 
to 1.2 m if aerosols were excluded in the models). These projections indicate 
changes more rapid than any experienced in the last 10,000 years, the current 
interglacial when modern society has evolved. Even if atmospheric 
concentrations of the greenhouse gases were immediately stabilized, society 
would be committed to a further increase in temperature of 0.5 C-2 C.

3.3 Ability to project climate changes at the regional level remains low. 

4. How Vulnerable are Ecological and Socio-Economic Systems and Human 
Health to Climate Change?

4.1 Quantitative projections of the impacts of the magnitude and rate of climate 
change on any particular ecological or socio-economic system are difficult 
because (i) regional scale climate change predictions are more uncertain than 
global climate change, (ii) our understanding of many critical processes is 
limited and (iii) the systems areinfluenced by multiple environmental and non-
environmental stresses. Various aspects of climate affect ecosystems and 
socio-economic systems differently: some systems are sensitive to a change in 
mean climate, some to changes in the frequency and severity of extreme 
weather events, some to the rate of change and some to changes in climate 
variability.

4.2 Most impact studies have only dealt with how systems would respond to a 
climate change resulting from a (arbitrary) doubling of atmospheric carbon 
dioxide concentration over its pre-industrial level. Few have considered the 
evolving responses of systems to steadily increasing greenhouse gas 
concentrations over the corresponding period, and fewer still have examined 
the consequences of greenhouse gas increases beyond this arbitrary doubling.

4.3 While there would be some beneficial effects of climate change, there 
would be many adverse effects, with some being potentially irreversible, e.g., 
loss of biological diversity and land. While population increases and human 
decisions about land use and harvesting intensities potentially represent the 
greatest pressures on most terrestrial and marine ecosystems in the foreseeable 
future, climate change represents an important additional stress factor which 
could result in the following impacts. 

a. Natural ecosystems: The boundaries of most ecosystems would shift with 
possible loss of biological diversity and affecting the goods and services 
ecosystem types (e.g., forests, grasslands, savannah) provide society. For 
example: even a rate of temperature change as low as 0.1 C per decade (the 
lower end of the range of IPCC projections), if sustained for a century, would 
result in significant loss of forest tree species as they cannot migrate quickly 
enough to keep pace; changes of a few degrees in temperature can result in the 
loss of species in the upper elevations of montane systems because no 
migration would be feasible for them as climate warms. 

b. Food security: There may be significant adverse consequences for food 
security in some regions of the world even though the current assessment has 
confirmed the 1990 IPCC conclusion that the aggregate effects of climate 
change on global agricultural production may be small to moderate. Studies 
tend to show more negative impacts for areas in the tropics where many of the 
world's poorest people live and where individuals are at greatest risk of 
hunger.

c. Sustainable economic development: Sustainable economic development in 
some countries will be threatened by loss of habitat, increases in human 
diseases and loss of life. Some human habitats are likely to be destroyed by sea 
level rise and possible change in extreme weather events, causing migration of 
populations and placing additional stresses on already stressed social and 
political systems. For human health, a critical issue is the projected increase in 
the incidence of vector-borne diseases such as malaria, especially in tropical 
and subtropical countries, and increased periods of severe heat stress in 
temperate zones.

4.4 Because both the rate and magnitude of climate change are important, the 
rates of change of atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases may be as 
important as stabilization levels. Non-disruptive adaptation in the structure and 
functioning of natural ecosystems and agriculture and other socio- economic 
systems is more likely, but not assured, with a slow rate of climate change. 
Rapid changes, on the other hand, may preclude non-disruptive adaptation.

4.5 Adaptation strategies for managed systems such as agriculture and water 
supply are generally improving because of technological advances. These 
advances, however, are not available in many parts of the world. In contrast, 
measures to assist adaptation in unmanaged ecosystems, such as provision of 
migration corridors, are not well developed.

4.6 The vulnerability of human health and socio-economic systems, and to a 
lesser extent of ecological systems, depends upon economic circumstances and 
institutional infrastructure. This implies that systems are typically more 
vulnerable in developing countries where technologies are fewer and less 
advanced and financial resources more scarce.

4.7 Incorporation of environmental concerns into resource-use and 
development decisions will enhance society's resilience to climate change. 

5. How do Emissions Relate to Levels of Stabilization of Greenhouse Gases? 

5.1 The Convention in Article 3 provides that the type of strategy used in 
reaching its objective should be comprehensive, covering all relevant sources, 
sinks and reservoirs of greenhouse gases. The individual radiative forcing 
(radiative forcing drives climate change) due to increases in the concentrations 
of different greenhouse gases - CO2, CH4, N2O and halocarbons and thereby 
implicitly stratospheric ozone - can be combined and the total expressed in 
terms of an "equivalent" CO2 concentration. This concept is helpful in 
analysing the comprehensive approach. 

5.2 Carbon cycle models can be used to estimate emission profiles and 
cumulative emissions of carbon dioxide for various stabilization levels. Such 
estimates have been made for an illustrative set of CO2 stabilization levels 
ranging from 450 ppmv to 750 ppmv. Table 1 shows the cumulative 
emissions. The cumulative emissions could be distributed in different ways 
over the time until stabilization: higher emissions earlier with lower emissions 
later or vice versa, for example. 

5.3 The cumulative emissions in table 1 are illustrated for two cases: with and 
without projected increases in methane and nitrous oxide until 2050 in 
accordance with IS 92a scenario. Accepting, for example, continued growth in 
the emissions of these gases would significantly reduce the room for 
cumulative emissions of carbon dioxide for a given stabilization level of 
"equivalent" carbon dioxide. 

5.4 Table 2 shows the cumulative emissions for all IS 92 scenarios. These 
figures together with table 1 suggest that to stabilize "equivalent" carbon 
dioxide at 750 ppmv would require emissions to be much lower than the 
central IS 92a (and IS92b) scenarios. Stabilization of "equivalent" carbon 
dioxide at 550 ppmv (about twice the pre-industrial level) or lower would 
require emissions to be lower than any of the IS 92 scenarios except IS 92c 
(where a low increase of world population to 6.3 billion in 2100 is assumed). 

5.5 Stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations at any of the arbitrary levels 
explored above would be possible only if anthropogenic emissions were 
eventually reduced well below 1990 levels. It is possible to choose other 
stabilization levels and time scales and pathways for achieving them.

5.6 The global average annual per capita emissions of carbon dioxide due to 
the combustion of fossil fuels is at present about 1.1 tonnes (as carbon). In 
addition, about 0.2 (net) tonnes are emitted per capita from deforestation and 
land-use changes. The average annual fossil fuel per capita emissions in 
developed countries is about 2.8 tonnes and

Table 1


Stabilization level
Equivalent CO2, ppmv
Cumulative CO2
Emissions, GtC
(1990-2100)
Global Mean Temperature
Change at Equilibrium, C



Without CH4
and N2O
increase to
2050
With CH4
and N2O
increase to
2050



450
560-760
450-620
1.1-3.3


550
800-980
660-810
1.5-4.5


650
920-1160
760-960
1.8-5.6


750
1140-1340
930-1090
2.1-6.3



varies from 1.5 to 5.5 tonnes. This compares to the figure of 0.5 tonnes for the 
same parameter in developing countries, ranging from 0.1 to 2.0 (in some 
cases more) tonnes. 

5.7 Given cumulative emissions and population figures, global annual average 
per capita carbon emissions can be derived. As an illustration, for the median 
UN population projections, the future average annual per capita use of fossil 
fuel cannot much exceed the current global average if the atmospheric 
concentration of carbon dioxide is to remain below 550 ppmv. Annual average 
per capita emissions would be higher for stabilization levels above 750 ppmv, 
but still less than 2 tonnes. 


Table 2


Emission Scenario
Cumulative CO2 Emission, GtC
(1990-2100)


IS 92e
2190


IS 92f
1830


IS 92a
1500


IS 92b
1430


IS 92d
980


IS 92c
770




6. Technology and Policy Options Available to Approach the Objective of the 
Convention

6.1 An extensive array of technologies and policy measures capable of 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions is available. However, there are social, 
institutional, financial, market, and legislative barriers to their application and 
implementation. Hence their technical potential may not be fully realized. 

a. Energy Supply: Emissions from the supply sector can be substantially 
reduced by:

- more efficient conversion of fossil fuels; - increased use of low carbon fossil 
fuels, by switching from coal to oil to 
natural gas;
- decarbonizing flue gases and fuels coupled with carbon dioxide storage; - 
increased use of renewable sources of energy, in particular biomass, solar, 
wind, hydropower, and geothermal;
- switching to nuclear energy.

b. Energy Demand: The technical potential for energy efficiency improvements 
in the industry, transport and human settlements sectors is large. It is estimated 
to be 10-30% globally at little or no cost, and, if relevant technologies and 
financing become available, 50-60% in developing countries. Options include: 

- Industry: improved electric motor drives and heating systems, efficient use 
of materials and integrating local heat and power systems; - Transport: 
changing vehicle design to use more efficient drivetrains, body 
shapes and materials, switching energy sources for propulsion, altering land-
use and traffic patterns, transport systems and life styles to reduce the level of 
passenger and freight transport activity and shifting to less energy intensive 
transportation modes;
- Human Settlements: more efficient space-conditioning systems, reduced 
heat losses through walls, ceilings and windows and more efficient lighting 
and appliances including refrigerators, water heaters, cook stoves, etc. 

c. Enhancement of Sinks: Management of agricultural lands, rangelands and 
forests can play an important role in reducing emissions and/or enhancing the 
sinks of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. Agricultural lands and 
forests can also be used to provide biomass fuels to replace fossil fuels. 
Estimates of the total amount of carbon that could be sequestered in the forestry 
and agriculture sectors over the next 50 years range from 90 to 155 GtC, 
which is equivalent to 8 to 40% of projected emissions in IS 92a scenario over 
the same period. Emissions can be reduced and atmospheric carbon can be 
sequestered at an estimated cost of $2-$8 per tonne (excluding land costs) 
through measures such as:

- altered management of agricultural soils and rangelands; - restoration of 
degraded agricultural lands and rangelands; - slowing deforestation;
- natural forest generation;
- establishment of tree plantations for biomass fuels and fibre; - promoting 
agroforestry.

6.6 Population and economic growth will drive future food and energy 
demands. The potential of the agricultural and forestry mitigation options needs 
to be further assessed in the context of competition for land in the face of such 
demands. 

6.9 Several policy instruments are available to facilitate penetration of low 
carbon intensive technologies and the modification of consumption patterns. 
The optimum mix of instruments will vary from country to country and could 
include: 

- labelling;
- market pull and demonstration programmes that stimulate the development 
and application of advanced technologies; - incentives such as provision for 
accelerated depreciation and reduced cost 
to consumer;
- utility demand-side management;
- negotiated agreements with industry;
- energy pricing (e.g., carbon or energy taxes) and reduced fossil fuel 
subsidies;
- tradeable emissions permits;
- regulatory programmes including minimum energy efficiency standards and 
fuel economy standards;
- reduction of agricultural subsidies.

7. Factors in Decision-Making

7.1 Article 2 provides the framework for cooperative decision-making in the 
international arena.

7.2 The uncertainties in the knowledge base make it difficult to assess the risks 
posed by anthropogenic climate change quantitatively. The inherent time lags 
between greenhouse gas emissions and climatic response and between climate 
change and ecosystems' adaptability (with potential irreversible impacts), and 
the lead times for infrastructure and capital turnover and for national and 
international political processes to come to fruition, need to be taken into 
account in making decisions. 

7.3 Action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions could have other benefits such 
as reduced traffic congestion, air pollution and soil erosion. The market and 
no-market value of such secondary benefits depends upon local circumstances, 
but can be considerable. Action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are likely 
to be more acceptable if designed to address simultaneously other concerns that 
impede sustainable development, and be more effective if tailored to local 
situations and developed through consultations with stakeholders.

7.3 Impacts and the costs of mitigation and adaptation will vary within and 
among countries raising issues of intranational, international and 
intergenerational equity. Perceived equity is an important element for 
legitimizing decisions and promoting national and international cooperation.

7.4 A sequential decision-making approach offers a prudent strategy that can 
be adjusted in the light of new information and could take into account factors 
such as future flexibility and current and future costs. Near term decisions 
along an optimal path (i.e., modest cost mitigation measures) will be the same 
for a wide range of ultimate stabilization concentrations.7.5 A broad portfolio 
of actions aimed at mitigation, adaptation and reducing uncertainties through 
further research provides a balanced approach to managing the risks of 
anthropogenic climate change. The appropriate portfolio will differ from 
country to country. A well-chosen portfolio of climate change investments will 
yield greater benefit for a given cost than any one option undertaken by itself. 

7.6 Delaying action might reduce the overall costs of mitigation, but would 
increase both the adaptation and damage costs because of the rate and the 
eventual magnitude of climate change.

7.7 Stabilizing CO2 concentrations, for example, near or below even 750 
ppmv would require immediate initiation of near term actions that include: 

(i) research and development on energy efficiency improvements, alternative 
sources of energy and strategies to accelerate diffusion of new technologies 
into the market place;
(ii) policies to encourage replacement of long-lived energy, transportation, and 
industrial infrastructure in normal investment cycles with plant and equipment 
that provides the highest amount of service and the lowest greenhouse gas 
emissions per unit of input energy and materials;
(iii) research and monitoring to promote a better understanding of the climate 
system and the impacts of climate variability; (iv) action on other measures 
with multiple benefits and no or low cost. 

7.11 "No regrets" measures are those whose benefits, such as reduced energy 
costs and lower emissions of local and regional pollutants, equal or exceed 
their cost to society, excluding the benefits of mitigation of climate change. 
Such "no regrets" mitigation and adaptation measures would appear justified 
on technical grounds unrelated to the risks of rapid climate change due to 
greenhouse gases. The expectation of net damages from climate change and the 
precautionary principle provide a rationale for going beyond "no regrets".


Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; name="synrept.asc" Content-ID: 
<Pine.3.89.9508171747.E11083@ties.itu.ch> Content-Description:

DRAFT

FOR INTERNAL USE ONLY
DO NOT CITE/DISTRIBUTE

THE IPCC ASSESSMENT OF KNOWLEDGE
RELEVANT TO THE INTERPRETATION OF
ARTICLE 2 OF THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE 
CHANGE: 
A SYNTHESIS REPORT
1995




1.1 Since the last Ice Age, generations of human beings have adapted their 
settlements, agriculture, water use, responses to health hazards and commercial 
activities to current climate (temperature and rainfall) and soils. Nonetheless 
there are losses incurred yearly due to variability in climate and large losses 
incurred frequently as a result of extreme weather events such as floods, 
storms and droughts. Human-induced climate change would be a stress, in 
some cases a major stress, that would add to existing stresses such as 
population and the non-sustainable exploitation of natural resources. A large 
and/or rapid change in climate is likely to affect the distribution and availability 
of these resources.

1.2 Assessments of climate change in the last decade have consistently 
concluded that human activities are significantly changing the composition of 
the atmosphere so that a climate change will occur if greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
continue to be emitted at current or greater rates of emission. However, 
scientists are as yet not confident about how climate will change regionally nor 
about its impacts. 

1.3 In recognition of these concerns, governments have negotiated, signed and 
ratified the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (hereinafter called 
the Convention). The Convention has entered into force. Its objective is 
expressed in Article 2 (see box 1).



Box 1

The ultimate objective of this Convention and any related legal instruments that 
the Conference of the Parties may adopt is to achieve, in accordance with the 
relevant provisions of the Convention, stabilization of greenhouse gas 
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous 
anthropogenic interference with the climate system. Such a level should be 
achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally 
to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to 
enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner.



1.4 A determination of what concentrations of GHGs are "dangerous" 
inherently requires policy judgements. It is not the role of the IPCC to make 
such a determination. But the IPCC assessments can provide useful 
information on questions such as: the projected response of the climate system 
to different scenarios of future GHG emissions; the vulnerability of natural and 
socio-economic systems to changes in climate; potential outcomes under 
different timings and levels of stabilization of GHG concentrations; and 
technological and economic policy options available to reduce future GHG 
emissions and their effectiveness and associated costs and their distributions. 
The report is based on the contributions of the three IPCC Working Groups to 
the IPCC Second Assessment Report.

1.5 The elements and their interactions within and between the global climate 
system and the global socio-economic system are shown in figure 1. The upper 
part details the interactions in the climate system and the lower part focuses on 
the human system. 


FIGURE 1














Increasing Greenhouse Gas Concentrations, Radiative Forcing and Changes in 
Climate and Sea Level

2.1 There is agreement that the atmospheric concentrations of GHGs have 
increased globally due to human activities (see table 1). As a result, the 
radiative balance between the Earth and the atmosphere has changed. This 
change can be expressed in terms of a radiative forcing of global climate (see 
figure 2). 

2.2 Small particles in the atmosphere (aerosols) arising from sulphur emissions 
from industrial sources and from biomass burning also have an important 
effect on radiative forcing. In contrast to most GHGs whose atmospheric 
lifetimes can vary from years to centuries, the aerosols have very short 
lifetimes (a few days). The concentrations of aerosols are therefore determined 
by current emissions. 

2.3 Substantial uncertainty surrounds not only the future concentrations of 
aerosols (because the severe environmental problems of high sulphur 
emissions are causes of concern) but also the physical mechanisms governing 
their radiative forcing. Further, aerosols are very inhomogeneous in their 
geographical distribution. It is important therefore to distinguish between the 
effects of long-living greenhouse gases and those of aerosols.

















TABLE 1

Summary of key greenhouse gases affected by human activities 





Gas

Pre-industrial
concentration

Concentration
in 1992
Recent rate of
concentration
change per
year (over
1980s)

Atmospheric
lifetime
(years)

Remarks


CO2
280 ppmv
355 ppmv
15ppmv/yr
(0.4%/yr)
50-200*
Almost
entirely
due to
human
activities


CH4
700 ppbv
1,714 ppbv
13ppbv/yr
(0.8%/yr)
12-17**
Natural and
anthropo-genic


N20
275 ppbv
311 ppbv
0,75ppbv/yr
(0.25%/yr)
120
Natural and
anthropo-genic


CFC-12

zero
503 pptv
18-20
pptv/yr
(4%/yr)
102
Entirely
human
origin


HCFC-22
(a CFC
sub-stitute)
zero
105 pptv
7-8pptv/yr
(7%/yr)
13.3
Anthropo-genic, low
concentra-tions now
but rising


CF4 (a
perfluo-rocarbon)
zero
70 pptv

1.1-1.3
pptv/yr
(2%/yr)
50,000
Anthropo-genic, very
long life-time, effecti-vely a per-manent atmospheric
resident


ppmv=parts per million by volume	ppbv=parts per billion by volume
pptv=parts per trillion by volume

* No single lifetime for CO2 can be defined because of different rates of uptake 
by 
different sink processes. ** This has been defined as an adjustment time which 
takes into account the indirect effect of CH4 on its own lifetime. 
FIGURE 2


2.3 Changes in global mean surface temperature and sea level are simple 
indicators of changes in mean climate. Global mean surface temperature (land 
and ocean) has increased by between 0.3 C and 0.6 C since the late 19th 
century and by 0.2 C to 0.3 c over the last 40 years, the period with the most 
reliable data (figure 3). Urbanization and land degradation account for only 
about 0.05 C of this increase. The warming has not been globally uniform: 
summer temperatures In the Northern Hemisphere in recent decades have been 
the warmest since about 1200 A.D; in some small regions (e.g., Northwestern 
North Atlantic), cooling has been observed. Over much of the land mass, the 
warming is associated with warmer nights rather than warmer days, although 
warmer days are also occurring. Figure 3 shows observed variability of 
surface temperature on interannual and decadal time scales which is similar to 
model estimates even when radiative forcing is absent. This variability arises 
from interactions between different components of the climate system and 
serves to mask trends due to systematic changes in radiative forcing.

(FIGURE 3)

2.4 It is more difficult to determine whether global mean precipitation has 
changed. Increases are evident in some places but not in others. 

2.5 Increasing surface temperature melts ice on land and warms the oceans. 
Thermal expansion of ocean waters and the water flowing from melting ice on 
land raises the level of the sea. (Melting sea ice does not raise the sea level.) 
Global mean sea level has risen by between 10 to 25 cm over the past 100 
years. About half of this rise could be due to melting glaciers and sea water 
expansion. The remainder could come from melting of large ice sheets but this 
is not conclusive. 

2.6 There have been both increases and decreases in extremes and variability of 
weather events during the last several decades. These changes have often been 
associated with the El Ni€o - Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon. 
However, data are inadequate at present to determine whether there have been 
world-wide changes in variability and extremes.

2.7 An important question is whether the rise in the global mean temperature 
over the past century can be explained as natural variability or whether there is 
an identifiable contribution from human activities. Compared to the warming 
projected by models (see paragraph 3.1 also) which take account of the 
increase of greenhouse gases alone, the observed warming is smaller. But if 
the effects of aerosols are included in the models, projections agree better with 
observations. Comparisons of the patterns of the observed warming with 
model projections have also been performed. These comparisons find much 
unexplained variation, but agreement is generally better with model patterns 
that include both aerosols and greenhouse gases than those which include 
greenhouse gases alone.

2.8 Overall, the best evidence to-date suggests that global mean temperature 
changes over the last century are unlikely to be entirely due to natural causes, 
and that a pattern of climatic response to human activities is identifiable in the 
climatological record.



3.1 Scenarios of future anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases (and 
their precursors) and the precursors of aerosols are used as inputs for models 
that project future climates. Starting from emissions, it is possible to calculate 
future atmospheric concentrations on the basis of atmospheric chemistry and 
global carbon cycle models. Radiative forcing, which is the fundamental 
variable used by climate models, is linked to greenhouse gas concentrations 
through well-established physical relationships. Radiative forcing due to 
aerosols can also be calculated, but with greater uncertainty than for 
greenhouse gases.

Projected Future Emissions of Greenhouse Gases and Aerosols (Emission 
scenarios)

3.2 In the absence of policies specifically designed to reduce anthropogenic 
GHG emissions, their atmospheric concentrations will increase. The key 
factors that determine future GHG emissions include population increase, 
energy demand, difficulties in moving away from fossil fuels giving rise to 
continuing heavy dependence on them, pressure on forests , increased use of 
private vehicles, etc. These various factors are assumed inputs in deriving 
plausible scenarios of future GHG emissions and contain uncertainties due to 
differing views on their future values and changes. Emission scenarios, which 
are not predictions, are divided into those which set out their projections in the 
absence of mitigation measures and those which take into account mitigation 
and adaptation measures.

3.3 The results of emission scenarios can vary considerably from actual 
outcomes even over short time horizons because the confidence in the 
applicability of their underlying assumptions diminishes as the time horizon 
increases. Therefore, an informed assessment of the possible consequences of 
uncertain future emissions paths necessitates the use of a range of scenarios. 

3.4 A set of six emissions scenarios, the so-called IS92 scenarios a through f, 
are presented in the IPCC 1992 Supplement to illustrate a range of plausible 
future emissions. The scenarios assume no new policies to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions (and are thus non-intervention scenarios as far as climate change 
is concerned). They extend to the year 2100 and include emissions of CO2, 
CH4, N2O, the halocarbons (CFCs and their substitutes HCFCs and HFCs) 
and sulphur emissions from industry and biomass burning.

3.5 The scenario of highest emissions (IS 92e) assumes high economic 
growth, moderate population growth, high fossil fuel availability and a phase-
out of nuclear power. The IS 92a scenario provides a central case (not 
necessarily the most likely case) projection of global emissions. Use of coal is 
assumed to increase with time and renewable energy sources are assumed to 
replace fossil fuels only to a modest degree. Its world population projection is 
close to the medium projections of three international organizations and global 
economic growth assumptions are close to the average of other published 
scenarios. The IS 92c and IS 92d scenarios assume constraints on economic 
growth and fossil fuel use and low population projection of 6.4 billion in 2100 
(for reference, current world population is 5.8 billion) and hence have low 
emissions. A summary of the assumptions in the scenarios is given in table 2. 

TABLE 2

3.6 Most published emission scenarios (including the IS 92 scenarios) show 
an increase in global annual greenhouse gas emissions, particularly CO2, over 
the next century. Virtually the only exceptions are scenarios which either 
incorporate very low population projections or policy measures. 

3.7 To understand the potential impact of climate change policies on emissions 
and resulting concentrations of greenhouse gases, it is illustrative to consider 
emission scenarios that explicitly include different policy options. These 
options may contain measures specifically directed at climate change mitigation 
or measures which have much the same effect although differently motivated 
(e.g. intended to mitigate local and regional air pollution). The World Energy 
Council (WEC) developed emissions cases based on a medium population 
projection (11.3 billion by 2100), economic growth assumptions with faster 
(5.6% p.a) and slower (4.6% p.a.) possibilities for developing countries, 
adjustments of the official GDP for purchasing power parity rather than market 
exchange rates, alternative assumptions about the pace of future energy 
efficiency improvements and alternative fuel mix possibilities in the light of 
known reserves. 

3.8 Two of the WEC scenarios imply atmospheric CO2 concentrations below 
600 ppmv by 2100 (one around 450 ppmv), and even their high growth case 
implies concentration below 700 ppmv. These and other studies illustrate the 
scope for policy measures - not necessarily solely based on climate change 
mitigation - directed at raising energy efficiency, accelerating the diffusion of 
non-fossil forms of energy, and reducing local and regional expected damages, 
so far as feasible, arising from conversion and use of fossil fuels.

3.9 In figures 5 (a) and 5 (b) are shown the concentrations of CO2 and CH4 in 
the IS 92 emission scenarios. It is evident that these non-intervention scenarios 
lead to rising concentrations of the greenhouse gases. 

FIGURE 5 (a)


FIGURE 5 (b)

3.7 Atmospheric concentrations of key long-lived greenhouse gases (such as 
CO2) at a given time are determined, to a first approximation, by the 
cumulative emissions up to that time. Cumulative emissions have a smaller 
range than annual emissions. Cumulative CO2 emissions for the years 1990 to 
2100 in the IS92 scenarios range between 700 and 2080 GtC and between 230 
and 330 GtC for 1990 - 2025. For comparison, emissions due to fossil fuel 
use between 1860 and 1994 amounted to 240 GtC (215 GtC for 1860 - 1990) 
and due to deforestation and changing land use to 80 - 120 GtC. On 
comparable (medium) population projections, the WEC cases indicate a range 
of 2.5 to 6 times past CO2 emissions (see figure 6). 

FIGURE 6

3.11 The emissions of sulphur dioxide, which are transformed into sulphate 
aerosols, depend primarily upon the sulphur content of oil and coal burned. 
The IS92 emissions scenarios assume that the anthropogenic sulphur 
emissions in 1990 amounted to about 80 TgS or million tonnes (for 
comparison, about 25 TgS were emitted from natural sources). This was 
projected to increase to 85, 115 and 130 TgS/yr respectively for the IS 92c, IS 
92a and IS 92e scenarios in 2050 and to 60, 140 and 200 TgS/yr in 2100. 
These estimates are quite uncertain, but are the only ones available for use in 
projecting the future radiative forcing of anthropogenic aerosols. 

Projected Changes in Global Mean Temperature and Mean Sea Level 

3.12 Future changes of climate due to human activities are estimated by first 
deriving patterns of radiative forcing from scenarios of atmospheric 
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols. The detailed response to 
these patterns of radiative forcing is obtained from models of the climate which 
take into account the physical and dynamical processes in all components of the 
climate system (atmosphere, ocean, land, ice and biosphere) and the 
interactions (most of which are non-linear) between them. Key to these model 
descriptions are feedbacks which act either to amplify or to reduce the basic 
radiative forcing signal. Because of our limited knowledge of these feedbacks, 
especially those involving clouds, considerable uncertainty remains in 
estimates of future climate change. Further uncertainty is associated with the 
role of the ocean which, because of its large heat capacity, acts to slow down 
the climate response to radiative forcing; the ocean also, through its ability to 
redistribute heat within the climate system, has an important role in determining 
the spatial patterns of climate change. 

3.13 Many model estimates of climate change have been made for the particular 
case of an equilibrium atmospheric state in which the radiative forcing is 
increased to that which would occur if the CO2 concentration were doubled 
over its pre-industrial value (such an estimate is known as the climate 
sensitivity). The IPCC assessments in 1990, 1992 and 1995 reported that the 
global average temperature rise for doubled CO2 at equilibrium is most likely 
to be in the range of 1.5 C - 4.5 C with a best estimate of 2.5 C.

3.14 Estimates of global mean temperature change for all of the IS92 scenarios 
are shown in figure 7. The extreme and middle estimates reflecting the range 
(and hence the uncertainty) in the climate sensitivity are shown in figure 8. 

FIGURE 7


FIGURE 8

3.15 For the central scenario (IS92a), global mean surface temperature 
increasesat a rate between 0.l6 C and 0.36 C per decade with greenhouse gases 
alone. If the effects of aerosols (less certain) are taken into account, the 
projected rates of warming over the next century are expected to be in the range 
0.14 C - 0.28 C per decade. 

FIGURE 9

3.16 For the same scenario, global mean sea level would rise by between 0.3 
and 1.0 m by the year 2100, if the greenhouse gases alone are considered. 
Inclusion of aerosols leads to a calculated rise over the same period of 0.2 to 
0.8 m. (These values are for the IS92a scenario.) Sea level is expected to 
continue to rise for several centuries after stabilization of GHG levels.

Projected Regional Changes of Climate and Sea Level 

3.17 Models with and without aerosols indicate that a change of climate will 
not be distributed uniformly around the globe (figure 10). The confidence in 
their projections of regional climate change, however, remains low. This is 
partly due to approximations in current models, and to the fact that the inherent 
predictability of climate diminishes as geographical scale is reduced.

FIGURE 10

3.18 Changes in future sea level will not occur uniformly around the globe. 
Recent model experiments suggest that the regional responses could differ by a 
factor of 2 to 3 from the mean due to regional differences in heating and 
changes in ocean circulation. In addition, geological and geophysical processes 
cause vertical land movements and these affect relative sea level changes on 
local and regional scales. 

3.19 The following general conclusions, nevertheless, can be drawn relating to 
climate change due to increasing GHGs only:


 Warming is projected to be in general greater over land than over the oceans; 
 Over land, maximum warming is expected in high northern latitudes in winter; 
 Several model experiments indicate that south Asian monsoon will strengthen. 


3.20 Since impacts are particularly related to climate variability and the 
occurrence of extreme weather events, possible changes in these deserve 
special attention. Model results lead to the following findings:


 A general warming tends to lead to an increase in high temperature events 
(heat 
waves) and a decrease in winter days below freezing; 
 Models indicate that global average precipitation would increase in a warmer 
climate. 
The probability of heavy precipitation events leading to floods is expected to 
increase; 
 All model experiments show that warming leads to increased evaporation. In 
regions 
that are currently prone to drought, droughts may become longer lasting and 
more severe;

 Models indicate changes in the precipitation patterns. In some places, 
increases in the 
probability of dry days and the length of dry spells (consecutive days without 
precipitation) are indicated. In those regions where mean precipitation 
decreases, droughts may increase markedly;

 Model experiments do not agree on systematic changes in overall storminess 
globally 
in a warmer world, but the possibility of systematic changes on the regional 
scale cannot be excluded;

 Changes of tropical cyclone frequency may be small in comparison with 
observed 
natural variability. There may, however, be some potential for changes of 
cyclone intensity in regions where sea surface temperature lies between 26 C 
and 29 C. 

3.22 Questions are often asked regarding the long-term stability of climate and 
whether large, almost discontinuous, changes could occur as a result of 
increasing greenhouse gases. One such change is concerned with the 
circulation of the ocean on the largest spatial scale. For instance, it is this 
circulation which maintains the region of the North Atlantic ocean several 
degrees warmer than it would otherwise be. Several experiments with complex 
climate models indicate that this large scale circulation might weaken with 
global warming. Observations also show that some change in this direction 
might have occurred in the last few decades. Further, both the study of palaeo-
climatic records and climate model experiments show that transitions to quite 
different circulation patterns might occur relatively rapidly. How likely is the 
occurrence of such events in response to global warming, how strong the 
radiative forcing will have to be for the change to be significant and the details 
of the accompanying changes are currently subjects of much scientific debate.

3.23 There is a very remote possibility that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet might 
gradually disintegrate because of a warmer climate, causing a significant rise in 
sea level. The specific circumstances under which such an event may occur are 
not known. 



4.1 Human-induced climate change would represent an important stress in a 
world where many systems are already threatened by increasing resource 
demands and non-sustainable management practices. Both the magnitude and 
the rate of climate change are important in determining the inherent sensitivity 
and adaptability of ecological and socio-economic system (Box 2). This section 
assesses the sensitivity, and the potential for adaptation, of human health and 
selected ecological and socio-economic sectors to changes in climate.

4.2	Quantitative projections of the impacts of the magnitudes and the rates 
of climate
change on any particular ecological or socio-economic system are difficult 
because (i) regional scale climate change predictions are uncertain, (ii) our 
understanding of many critical processes is limited, and (iii) the systems are 
influenced by multiple environmental and non-environmental factors. 
Moreover, most impact studies have only assessed how systems would 
respond to a climate change resulting from a (arbitrary) doubling of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations over its pre-industrial level. Very 
few have considered the evolving responses of systems to steadily increasing 
greenhouse gas concentrations over the corresponding period, and fewer still 
have examined the consequences of increases in greenhouse gas concentrations 
beyond doubling.

Human Health

4.3 Projected changes in climate are likely to result in a wide range of human 
health impacts, most of them adverse, and many of which would reduce life 
expectancy. In many cases there is likely a threshold of minimum temperature 
associated with the occurrence of an adverse health impact. However, 
quantifying the impacts is difficult and depends on co-existent and interacting 
factors other than climate change, which include environmental circumstances 
and socio-economic conditions such as nutritional and immune status, water 
purity, population density, social infrastructure, working conditions and access 
to health care.






Box 2

Sensitivity is the response of a system to a change in climatic conditions. 

Adaptation refers to adjustments in practices, processes, and structures of 
systems to projected or actual changes in attributes of climate. Adaptations can 
be autonomous or planned (planning could be reactive or anticipatory). 
The ability to adapt determines whether a system can turn new climate 
conditions into an opportunity to become more successful, or whether it incurs 
losses that weaken its efficiency or even its ability to survive. Most societies 
and resource-use sectors already contend with contemporary climatic variability 
and the wide range of associated natural hazards and unexpected opportunities. 
The ability of some systems to adapt to changes may be reduced by 
simultaneous exposure to other stresses (habitat fragmentation, acid 
deposition, influx of toxic pollutants, etc.).
Some societies have more human, technological, and financial resources at 
their disposal with which to modify their environmental or social/economic 
systems. 

Vulnerability is the extent to which a system may be damaged or harmed by 
climate change and depends not only on the sensitivity of systems to variations 
in attributes of climate, but also on the ability of these systems to adapt by 
adjusting to new climatic conditions.
Natural ecosystems are more vulnerable to climate change than managed 
ecosystems because adaptation options for the former are more limited and 
human intervention can control to some extent needed inputs of water and 
nutrients for the latter.
Developing countries are more vulnerable to climate change than developed 
countries which have greater resources for adaptation. 



4.4 Climate change can directly affect human health by increased exposure to 
very hot weather events and more frequent weather hazards (e.g., droughts, 
floods, and severe storms) increasing injuries, death, and destruction of public 
health infrastructure. An increase in the frequency and/or severity of heat 
waves would affect even populations that are acclimatized to high background 
temperatures resulting in several thousand additional deaths per year world-
wide. Temperature increases in colder regions should result in fewer cold-
related deaths. The ability to withstand severe heat waves depends upon the 
susceptibility of a given population, which is a function of socio-economic 
differences, physiological acclimatization, and cultural-technical adaptation. 
Temperature and humidity thresholds and physiological tolerances vary and 
generally increase towards the equator.

4.5 Climate change can indirectly affect human health through altered disease 
transmission and nutritional status and exacerbation of existing health 
disorders. Increases in transmission of vector-borne infectious diseases may 
result from increases in the geographical distribution of the vector organisms of 
those diseases (e.g., mosquitoes that spread malaria, dengue and yellow fever; 
water snails that spread schistosomiasis; and black flies that spread river 
blindness), and from climate-change driven variations in the life-cycle 
dynamics of both the vector and the infectious parasite. With malaria for 
example, the parasite cannot develop inside its mosquito host at temperatures 
below 16 C. There is already evidence that malaria, yellow fever and dengue 
fever are persisting at higher altitudes and latitudes. It is estimated that the 
potential transmission of malaria and river blindness could increase by 
approximately 20% (i.e., an extra 50-80 million prevalent cases of malaria and 
3.5 million cases of river blindness). Any such increase would primarily affect 
tropical, subtropical, and some less well-protected temperate-zone populations 
currently at the margins of endemically infected areas. Increasing transmission 
of certain contagious diseases (cholera, for example, through an increase in 
algal blooms in warm coastal waters and wetlands) may also be caused by 
changes in climate. Climate-change related decreases in food production may 
impair nutritional status, especially in some developing countries whose 
populations currently have insecure access to food supplies. Conversely, 
climate change may also help improve food production, and therefore 
nutritional status, in some regions. Finally, climate change may exacerbate 
respiratory disorders and allergies by intensifying the effects of air pollution 
(ozone and particulates), particularly in densely-populated urban areas.

4.6 Options for adapting to the potential health effects of climate change are 
available. However, much of the world's population already suffers from poor 
environmental health conditions and has little access to health care, and these 
populations would be the least likely to have access to adaptive measures. At 
the population level, public health surveillance-and-control measures 
(especially for infectious diseases), the introduction of protective technologies 
(e.g. insulated buildings, air-conditioning), improved primary health care 
(such as use of malarial prophylactics and vaccines such as that for yellow 
fever), and improved large-scale health monitoring could play a significant role 
in reducing the range of health impacts. At the individual level, people can be 
encouraged to limit dangerous exposures (e.g. by use of protective clothing, 
mosquito nets, repellents, sun screens, etc.). 

Water Systems

4.7 Fresh water, an essential component of national welfare and productivity, 
is an increasingly scarce commodity. The world's agriculture, hydroelectric 
and thermal power generation, municipal and industrial water needs, water 
pollution control, and inland navigation depend on the natural endowment of 
surface and groundwater resources. Reductions in natural freshwater resources 
could result in chronic shortages in regions that are already under stress and for 
which there is considerable competition among users.

4.8 Climate change could represent an additional stress on the hydrological 
cycle that is already under a variety of stresses, such as depletion of aquifers, 
urbanization, changes in vegetative cover, and chemical contamination. The 
complexity of the hydrological system and the many influences on it, combined 
with the uncertainty of the regional distribution of changes in temperature and 
precipitation in climate model results, make it difficult to project precisely 
where stresses on water resources would be greatest.

4.9 Current evidence suggests that a warmer climate would result in changes in 
the timing, regional patterns, and intensity of precipitation events. This would 
lead to changes in the seasonal availability of water for agriculture and supplies 
of drinking water (timing of precipitation); river flow (regional patterns of 
precipitation); and flooding (intensity of precipitation). While climate models 
project increases in global mean precipitation, higher temperatures would 
increase evapotranspiration. Higher evaporation rates may lead to reduced run-
off and streamflow in some areas despite increased precipitation.

4.10 Global climate change would have the largest effects on countries which 
extract a high percentage of their available water resources. In particular, the 
current arid and semi-arid regions of the world are likely to be significantly 
affected and could experience the largest decreases in run-off, the latter posing 
the greatest challenges for water resources management.

4.11 Management of water resources should be a continuously adaptive 
enterprise, responding to changing demands, hydrological conditions, 
technologies, and economic shifts. Water management practices seek to control 
demand for water, and to increase supplies, for example, by increasing 
reservoir capacity. However, experts disagree over whether water supply 
systems will evolve substantially enough in the future to compensate for the 
anticipated negative impacts of climate change on water resources and for 
potential increases in demand. To the extent that existing water supply and 
quality problems are not addressed, especially in developing countries, 
optimistic projections about adequate water supplies of sufficient quality will 
not hold. 

Natural Ecological Systems

4.12 Ecosystems are regulated by numerous aspects of the physical 
environment such as atmospheric composition, soil properties, topography, 
and climate variables such as temperature, precipitation, and cloudiness. 
Changes in climate, and associated changes in the frequency of fires and 
prevalence of pests could alter the structure (biological diversity) and function 
(productivity, carbon storage and nutrient recycling) of terrestrial ecosystems, 
thus affecting the critical goods and services they provide to society. These 
goods and services include: (i) provision of food, fibre, medicines, and 
energy; (ii) regulation of water run-off to control floods and soil erosion; (iii) 
assimilation of wastes and purification of water; and (iv) maintenance of an 
attractive environment for recreation and tourism. While population increases 
and human decisions about land use and harvesting intensities will probably 
represent the greatest pressures on most terrestrial and marine ecosystems for 
the foreseeable future, climate change would represent a significant additional 
stress factor. 

Forests

4.13 The consequences of climate change for forest ecosystems depend on the 
magnitude and the rate of change and their potential to adapt. The rate at which 
climate zones shift is important because different species migrate at different 
rates, depending on their growth and reproductive cycles. A global mean 
warming of 1 C-4 C over the next 100 years would be equivalent to a poleward 
shift of temperature bands of approximately 160-640 km. The historical 
migration rates for tree species, based on the palaeo-environmental record, are 
generally believed to be on the order of 4 - 200 km per century. Thus some 
forest species may be unable to migrate sufficiently rapidly to keep pace with 
shifts in the climate zones. 

4.14 An increase in mean annual air temperature of 1 C is sufficient to cause 
changes in the growth and regeneration capacity of many forest species, and 
hence in the composition of forest ecosystems. Under a doubled-CO2 
equilibrium climate scenario, global models project major changes in vegetation 
types, (i.e., transformation from one equilibrium vegetation class to another) 
over a substantial fraction (14- 65% with a global mean of 34%) of the existing 
forested area of the world. Boreal forests will be most affected, with tropical 
forests being least affected. Such a transition will have implications for animal 
and microbial biodiversity because of habitat loss, as well as for commodity 
extraction and management practices within forests. 

4.15 While it can be inferred that higher rates and larger magnitudes of change 
will have stronger impact, a key uncertainty is the fate of forested systems 
during the transition from one equilibrium climate to another (assuming a new 
equilibrium will be established). Changes in species range, disturbance 
regimes (fires, pests, and diseases), and increased temperatures (which 
increases respiration) may decrease standing biomass during the transition, 
even though the net primary productivity of forests may increase due to the so-
called CO2 fertilization effect (see paragraph 4.24 also).

4.16 Measures to assist adaptation in unmanaged ecosystems are not well 
developed, especially for complex forested ecosystems. Human activities 
fragment most landscapes limiting the ability of populations to follow changing 
habitat distribution. One adaptation strategy would be to establish a distributed 
system of reserves based on model projections of future habitats. Migration to 
such reserves (or other appropriate habitats) could be assisted by 
transplantation or by means of migration corridors of relatively undisturbed 
habitat and by reducing the competition for resources or other stresses at 
critical stages in life-cycles (e.g. seedling stage for plants, juvenile period for 
animals). 

4.17 Article 2 provides that GHG concentrations be stabilized in a time-frame 
sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change. Ecosystems 
do not adapt to climate change but individual species do. Hence, the rate of 
climate change affects the way in which ecosystems disassemble-assemble and 
reassemble into new ecological systems. At the present rate of GHG 
emissions, global mean temperatures are projected to increase by about 0.2 C 
per decade, a rate which is at least twice the historically observed maximum 
rate. Therefore, forested ecosystems will be unable to completely adjust to 
such rates and some species may become extinct. 

Coastal Ecosystems

4.18 Coastal ecosystems such as salt-water marshes, mangrove ecosystems, 
coastal wetlands, coral reefs, coral atolls and reef islands provide a wide range 
of goods and services to society such as providing important habitats and 
nurseries for wildlife and fish and centres for tourism and fishing, and 
protecting islands and coastal areas from wave actions and severe storms. 
These ecosystems are under various stresses including overexploitation of 
resources, pollution, sediment starvation and urbanization. They are also 
exceptionally vulnerable to increases in temperature and sea level. 

4.19 Coral reefs, coral atolls and reef islands and deltas are particularly 
vulnerable to even modest increases in temperature, resulting in a significant 
increase in the frequency of coral bleaching, submergence, and coastal erosion. 
If seawater temperature increases of 3 C-4 C are sustained for a period of 
months, considerable coral mortality can ensue. Severe bleached corals can 
take decades to centuries to recover.

4.20 Sea level is projected to increase at a rate of 2-8 cm per decade (20-80 
cms by 2100) for the IS92 emission scenarios, a rate several times faster than 
experienced during the last 100 years. Reef accretion rates are typically 1- 10 
cm per decade and hence corals should not be particularly vulnerable to 
increases in sea level unless accretion rates significantly decrease due to 
warmer sea temperatures. 

Vulnerability of Socio-Economic Sectors

Agriculture

4.21 Based on several model projections of future global food production, one 
view holds that global food availability would increase relative to population. 
An alternative view is that the historical trend of generally improving food 
supply will not be continued because of resource degradation and the inability 
of technological advances to keep up with population growth. Climate change 
would represent yet another stress on some of the world's agroecosystems.

4.22 Agricultural productivity is sensitive to two broad classes of climate-
induced effects on the quality and quantity of harvestable yield: direct effects 
from changes intemperature, water balance, atmospheric composition and 
extreme weather events; and indirect effects through changes in soils and the 
distribution and frequency of infestation by insects, diseases, weeds, and other 
predators. The vulnerability of agricultural production to climate change 
depends not only on the physiological response of the affected plants, but also 
on the ability of the affected socio-economic systems of production to cope 
with fluctuations in yield. 

4.23 Recent studies have confirmed the conclusion of the IPCC 1990 
Assessment that the aggregate effects of climate change on global agricultural 
production are likely to be small to moderate. However, global food supply is 
only one aspect of the issue and large differences are projected at local and 
regional scales. Studies tend to show more negative impacts for areas in the 
tropics where many of the world's poorest people live and where individuals 
are currently at greatest risk of hunger. Large yield losses in one locality and 
for one type of crop are balanced by large gains in other localities, both within 
and among countries (e.g. frequently more than +/- 20 %). Low- latitude, low-
income populations depending on isolated, dryland agricultural systems in 
semi-arid and arid regions are particularly vulnerable. Many of these 
populations at risk are in Sub-Saharan Africa, South, East and South East 
Asia, as well as some islands in the Pacific. The risks may be underestimated 
because the studies do not include indirect effects of climate change on 
agriculture via insects, weeds and diseases. 

4.24	Several major food crops (e.g., wheat, rice, and soybeans), should 
benefit from
improved water use efficiency and increased productivity because of the 
interaction of increased atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and their 
particular photosynthetic process (the so-called CO2 fertilization effect). On 
average, such crops will see a 30 percent increase in yield (for a doubled 
carbon dioxide environment), although the variation in response is wide (-10 to 
+80 percent). Temperature increases at high latitudes are likely to increase crop 
growth, through lengthening and intensifying of the growing season, 
assuming adequate availability of water and suitable soils. At low and low-to-
mid latitudes, where temperatures are already high, temperature increases may 
cause increases in the frequency of heat stress on crops and decreases in 
available water through higher rates of evaporation and transpiration. In 
contrast, some other major crops (e.g., sugar cane, maize, millet, and 
sorghum) and some common weeds, which have different photosynthetic 
processes, will benefit less from increased carbon dioxide concentrations.

4.25 Adaptation will be important to limit losses or take advantage of changing 
climatic conditions. Major classes of agricultural adaptation options considered 
in the literature include: (i) breeding new crops and cultivars for changed 
climate conditions; (ii) improved management strategies such as altered 
irrigation practices or planting times; (iii) adding nutrients to take full advantage 
of the projected CO2 fertilization effect; (iv) employing soil conservation and 
protection strategies; and (v) research on pest control. The incremental costs of 
adaptation could be a serious burden for developing countries. 

Coastal Zones and Small Islands Infrastructure 

4.26 Sea-level rise can have a number of negative impacts on tourism, ports 
and harbours, human settlements, natural freshwater systems in coastal areas, 
agriculture, insurance industry, and cultural systems and values. Climate 
change projected for the IS 92 emission scenarios would increase the 
vulnerability of coastal populations to flooding. Currently an annual average of 
about 50 million people experience flooding due to storm surges. A 50 cm sea-
level rise would increase this number to about 92 million and a 1 meter sea-
level to about 118 million. The estimates will be substantially higher if one 
incorporates population growth projections. Developing country populations, 
such as those of Bangladesh or China, will be more vulnerable because their 
existing sea and coastal protection systems are less well established and also 
because their population growth rates are higher, putting more people at risk. 
For such countries, sea-level rise could force internal or international migration 
of populations. 

4.27 A number of studies have evaluated the sensitivity to a 1 meter sea level 
rise (the upper end of the range projected for the IS 92 scenarios). These 
studies show that small islands and deltaic areas are particularly vulnerable 
with land losses, for example, of 0.05% in Uruguay, 1.0% in Egypt, 6% in 
the Netherlands, 17.5% in Bangladash and about 80% in the Marshall Islands. 
In some cases, such land losses can be reduced through coastal protection 
measures. However, there are major technical, environmental and economic 
constraints in implementing them. While annual adaptation/protection costs for 
these nations are relatively modest (about 0.1% GDP), average annual costs to 
many small island states and deltaic coasts are much higher amounting to 
several percent of GDP assuming that adaptation is at all possible. Many 
nations face loss of capital value in excess of 10% of GDP. Large numbers of 
people would be affected, e.g., about 70 million in both China and 
Bangladesh. 

4.28 For coastal states with access to financial and technical resources, a wide 
array of management options are available to prevent, ameliorate or compensate 
for coastal-zone damages encountered under current climate variability and 
which could be encountered under future climate change. The emphasis in the 
past has been on engineering responses to coastal erosion and protection 
against flooding, with action often being triggered in response to an extreme 
event. Heavily populated industrial and urban areas are primary candidates for 
structural protection measures such as dikes, seawalls and breakwaters. These 
are high-cost options. Economic evaluation principles, especially risk 
assessments and cost-benefit analyses, should be of use in deciding whether to 
protect or retreat. In addition, the range of options includes non- structural 
adaptation such as zoning, land-use regulation and flood-damage insurance, 
with emphasis on a precautionary approach in locating investments. 

Conclusions on Vulnerability to Climate Change 

4.29 There are a number of important conclusions that are not specific to any 
one ecological or socio-economic system:


 The sensitivity of ecological and socio-economic systems is not distributed 
evenly 
across the globe. Various aspects of climate affect systems differently. Some 
systems are sensitive to changes in mean climate; some to changes in the 
frequency and magnitude of extreme events; some to the rate of climate change; 
and some to changes in climate variability;

 While there would be some beneficial effects of climate change, there would 
be many 
adverse effects, with some being potentially irreversible, e.g., loss of 
biological diversity and loss of land;

 The ability to adapt to a changing climate is improving because of 
technological 
advances. However, the majority of human beings do not have access to such 
technological advances;

 The vulnerability of human health and socio-economic systems, and to a lesser 
extent 
ecological systems, depends upon economic circumstances and institutional 
infrastructure. This implies that systems are typically more vulnerable in 
developing countries where economic and institutional circumstances are less 
favourable; 
 Both the rate and magnitude of climate change are important. Hence, the rate 
of 
change of atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases may be as important 
as the stabilization level. A slow rate of climate change permits, but does not 
assure, non-disruptive adaptations in the structure and function of natural 
ecosystems, agriculture, and other socio- economic systems. Rapid change, on 
the other hand, may preclude non-disruptive adaptations;

 Uncertainties associated with projections of changes in local and regional 
climate 
present a challenge in designing adaptation strategies; 
 Incorporation of environmental and sustainability concerns into resource-use 
and 
development decisions and plans for infrastructure investments will enhance 
society's resilience to climate change.

4.30 Table 3 summarizes the major threats and adaptation potential for natural, 
agricultural, and socio-economic systems. For the present rate of greenhouse 
gas emissions, global mean temperatures are projected to increase by between 
0.1 C and 0.4oC per decade, with associated changes in other climatic factors, 
including precipitation.


 For natural ecosystems ,this would result in: (i) loss of species from forests as 
they fail 
to migrate rapidly enough to keep pace with such rates; (ii) loss of montane 
because migration would not be feasible for them as climate warms; and (iii) 
the destruction of coral reefs as the surrounding waters become too warm for 
the coral reef organism to reproduce and grow. Adaptation options for natural 
ecosystems are limited at best and would be very costly for broad scale 
implementation. 
 For food production, the consequences are most important at the local and 
regional 
levels. Agricultural systems in the developing countries of the tropics may be 
subject to increasing drought stress as the result of increased temperatures and 
reductions in precipitation. While technologies exist that could permit these 
systems to adapt to climate change, these technologies are often costly and 
therefore, may not be available to the countries that need them most.

 Human health and habitats are also at risk. For human health, a critical issue is 
possible increase in the incidence of vector-borne diseases such as malaria, 
especially in developing countries, and heat spells. Some parts of human 
habitats are likely to be destroyed by sea level rise and possible change in 
extreme weather events, causing migration of populations and placing 
additional stresses on already stressed social and political systems.



TABLE 3



System
Consequence
Adaptation Potential


Natural Ecosystems:

Forests


Montane

Coastal marshes

Coral reefs


Loss of species and
goods and services

- ditto -

- ditto -

- ditto -


Limited but costly


Non-existent

Very limited but costly

Non-existent


Cryosphere
Loss of glaciers, reduced
snowpack
Non-existent


Agriculture
Redistribution, reduced
yields in developing
countries
High but potentially costly


Water resources
Reduction in quantity and
quality
High but costly


Human settlements
Coastal and river flooding
threatening human
habitat, causing
displacement of people
High but costly


Human health
Loss of life, increased
diseases
High but costly


4.31 The economics literature contains a few aggregate estimates of the 
damages associated with a doubled CO2 concentration scenario. The estimates 
suggest that the associated warming would impose net damages equivalent to 
between 1.5% and 2.0% of world GDP on the present world economy. The 
regional variation in climate change damage would be substantial. However, 
there is little agreement across the studies about the magnitude of each category 
of damages or the relative ranking of the damage categories. Climate changes 
of this magnitude are not expected to occur for some decades and damages in 
the interim would be smaller. Some impacts, such as potential loss of low-
lying areas, may be so significant physically and culturally that no monetary 
compensation would be sufficient. [NOTE: This paragraph will be made 
consistent with the 1995 Summary for policymakers of Working Group III.] 




Box 3

The Framework Convention on Climate Change defines its objective (in Article 
2) as stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. 
Stabilization of emissions is often confused with stabilization of 
concentrations. 

Stabilization of emissions refers to a situation in which the GHG emissions in 
one year are the same as in the previous year.

A stable concentration of a greenhouse gas refers to a state of dynamic 
equilibrium between the atmosphere, the ocean, and the terrestrial ecosystems. 
In this state of equilibrium, aggregate annual emissions of the gas from the 
surface of the planet are just balanced by removals of the same gas from the 
atmosphere. As a consequence, the concentration of the gas in the atmosphere 
remains unchanged. 



5.1 As noted in the previous sections, some damage and adaptation costs of a 
human-induced climate change may be unavoidable. Even though there are 
major uncertainties about the magnitude and pace of a climate change due GHG 
emissions and about how serious it will be, the uncertainties do not diminish 
the risk itself but merely make its quantification difficult. Risks would vary 
markedly from country to country.

5.2 An analytical approach to the issue of stabilization of concentrations is 
presented in the following pages. It is purely illustrative and designed to 
expose the dimensions of the problem only. It has no implication of policy 
recommendation whatsoever. 

5.3 The Convention in Article 3 (see box 4) provides that the type of strategy 
to be used in reaching its objective should be comprehensive, covering all 
relevant sources, sinks, and reservoirs of greenhouse gases. It is important to 
keep this provision in mind when synthesizing scientific-technical information 
relevant to Article 2. Because of the multiplicity of sources and the variety of 
gases involved, there is no single strategy for stabilization.


Box 4

In their actions to achieve the objective of the Convention and to implement its 
provisions, the Parties shall be guided, inter alia, by the following: 

1. The Parties should protect the climate system for the benefit of present and 
future generations of humankind, on the basis of equity and in accordance with 
their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. 
Accordingly, the developed country Parties should take the lead in combating 
climate change and the adverse effects thereof. 

2. The specific needs and special circumstances of developing country Parties, 
especially those that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate 
change, and of those Parties, especially developing country Parties, that would 
have to bear a disproportionate or abnormal burden under the Convention, 
should be given full consideration. 

3. The Parties should take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent or 
minimize the causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse effects. Where 
there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific 
certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing such measures, taking 
into account that policies and measures to deal with climate change should be 
cost-effective so as to ensure global benefits at the lowest possible cost. To 
achieve this, such policies and measures should take into account different 
socio- economic contexts, be comprehensive, cover all relevant sources, sinks 
and reservoirs of greenhouse gases and adaptation, and comprise all economic 
sectors. Efforts to address climate change may be carried out cooperatively by 
interested Parties. 

4. The Parties have a right to, and should, promote sustainable development. 
Policies and measures to protect the climate system against human-induced 
change should be appropriate for the specific conditions of each Party and 
should be integrated with national development programmes, taking into 
account that economic development is essential for adopting measures to 
address climate change. 

5. The Parties should cooperate to promote a supportive and open international 
economic system that would lead to sustainable economic growth and 
development in all Parties, particularly developing country Parties, thus 
enabling them better to address the problems of climate change. Measures 
taken to combat climate change, including unilateral ones, should not constitute 
a means of arbitrary or unjustifiable discrimination or a disguised restriction on 
international trade.


5.4 The direct radiative forcing due to enhanced concentrations of all 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere was about 2.4 W/m2 in 1994 of which 
1.55 W/m2 was due to increased carbon dioxide (see figure 2). The forcing 
due to all greenhouse gases in 1994 was equivalent to that due to a 
concentration of CO2 alone of (about) 420 ppmv. Thus the figure of 420 ppmv 
CO2 is the equivalent CO2 concentration for the radiative forcing of 1994. (For 
comparison, the actual CO2 concentration in 1994 was 356 ppmv.) The 
concept of equivalent CO2 concentration is helpful in approaching the 
simultaneous stabilization of all the GHG concentrations in the atmosphere - 
the so-called comprehensive approach.

5.5 The individual reductions in emissions for stabilizing the concentrations of 
carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and halocarbons, and thereby implicitly 
stratospheric ozone, can be combined in different ways for stabilizing the total 
global radiative forcing in the comprehensive approach. To these, the forcing 
due to changes in tropospheric ozone and aerosols should be added; this cannot 
be easily done - and has not been done in the illustrations that follow - because 
of limited information on their future concentrations and geographical 
distributions. 

5.6 Different greenhouse gases have different residence times in the 
atmosphere. 


 Tropospheric ozone and tropospheric aerosols have residence times of the 
order of 
a day and of a week respectively. Their concentrations are governed directly by 
the emissions of their precursors.

 Methane has a residence time of 12-17 years and will stabilize in about 50 
years if 
its emissions were stabilized.

 Other greenhouse gases have longer residence times spanning many decades 
to 
centuries. The concentration of each of them is governed by some 
(determinable) fraction of its emissions accumulating in the atmosphere over 
decades to centuries. The concept of cumulative emissions of the long-lived 
greenhouse gases helps in understanding the complexities associated with 
stabilization. 

Carbon Emissions and Stabilization of CO2 Concentrations 

5.7 Because carbon dioxide presently contributes more than half of the direct 
annual increase in the radiative forcing (with probably a greater fraction in the 
future), stabilizing CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere would appear to be 
necessary for stabilizing future total global radiative forcing.

5.8 Profiles of atmospheric CO2 concentrations can be constructed assuming 
smooth variations in the rates of increase in its concentrations from the current 
value to different stabilization levels. Such profiles for concentrations of 350, 
450, 550, 650 and 750 ppmv, published previously by the IPCC, are shown 
in figure 11. It is possible to choose other stabilization levels and time scales 
and pathways for achieving them. 

FIGURE 11

5.9 Carbon cycle models can be used to derive profiles of total anthropogenic 
carbon emissions corresponding to the concentration profiles shown in figure 
11. Such emission profiles are shown in figure 12. More rapid increases in the 
concentrations in the beginning would lead to higher initial emissions than 
those given in figure 12, but greater reductions would be necessary later if 
stabilization were to be achieved at any given concentration. Emissions to 
achieve the stabilization levels illustrated here are, after some decades, lower 
than those of the IS 92 scenarios. Also, all emissions eventually have to be 
below the 1990 emissions and be maintained there. Emissions would be 
greater for stabilization levels higher than those shown in figure 11. 

FIGURE 12

5.10 Figure 13 provides, as an illustration, estimates of cumulative global 
carbon emissions until the year 2100 for various stabilization levels of CO2. 
The figure also illustrates cumulative emissions for the IS92a emissions 
scenario. (These values may be compared to the estimated emissions of 240 
GtC from fossil fuel use between 1860 and 1994, about 60% of which came 
from burning solid fuels.) 

FIGURE 13

5.11 Because of the inertia of the carbon cycle and of the socio-economic 
system, it would take a decade or two for significant deviations from non-
intervention emissions profiles to become noticeable. The selection of the 
illustrative concentration profiles (figure 11) assumes this inertia and 
consequently the emissions in figure 12 do not deviate much from each other in 
the first decade or two. A delay beyond a few years hence to initiate 
appropriate measures to reduce emissions would result in steeper rates of 
reduction later, if, for example, stabilization of CO2 is aimed for at 550 ppmv 
or below.

5.12 Given cumulative emissions and population figures, global annual 
average per capita carbon emissions can be derived. Figure 14 shows values of 
annual average per capita emissions derived for stabilization of CO2 
concentrations at 450, 550, 650 and 750 ppmv, taking the corresponding 
cumulative emissions from figure 13 and assumingthe UN median estimates of 
population growth to about 9.5 billion in 2050 and about 11 billion persons in 
2100. If other population estimates were used, the values would change 
accordingly.

FIGURE 14

5.13 The average annual per capita carbon emission for the globe as a whole 
due to fossil fuel burning is at present about 1.1 tonnes. (In addition, a net of 
0.2 tonne is emitted from deforestation and land-use change.) It is on average 
about 2.8 tonnes from fossil fuels in developed countries (including countries 
with economies in transition). National annual per capita emissions vary 
between 1.5 and 5.5 tonnes. In the developing world, the average annual per 
capita emission is about 0.5 tonne (with a range of 0.1 to about 2.0 tonnes). 
The future global average annual per capita emissions from fossil fuel use 
cannot exceed the current global average by very much if the atmospheric 
concentration of carbon dioxide is to remain at 550 ppmv (about double the 
pre-industrial level) or below. Larger annual per capita emissions would be 
possible if stabilization at higher concentrations were to be aimed for. 

Stabilization of Other Greenhouse Gases

5.14 Methane: The atmospheric residence time for methane, at 12 to 17 years, 
is comparatively short. If current emissions and removal rates were held 
constant, atmospheric concentration would stabilize at about 1.9 ppmv 
(compared to the 1994 concentration of 1.73 ppmv and the estimated pre-
industrial concentration of about 0.65 ppmv). On the other hand, stabilization 
at present concentration would require a reduction in the emissions by about 
10%. 

5.15 Nitrous oxide: The lifetime of nitrous oxide in the atmosphere is about 
120 years. A reduction of anthropogenic emissions by about 50% is required 
in order to stabilize the concentration at present level. If emissions were 
stabilized at the present level, the concentration would increase to about 400 
ppbv during the next century (compared to 310 ppbv today and an estimated 
pre-industrial concentration of approximately 280 ppbv).

5.16 Halogen-containing compounds and stratospheric ozone: The 
concentrations of the CFC-gases in the atmosphere are expected to stabilize 
gradually in the next few years. A very slow decrease in their concentrations is 
then expected and a return towards natural stratospheric ozone concentrations 
during the 22nd century. 

5.17 Other than CFCs, most other halocarbons have lifetimes in the 
atmosphere of years to a few decades. Their contributions to human-induced 
radiative forcing is slight at present. The lifetimes of HCFC-22 and HFC-134 
are 13 and 18 years respectively. The projected increase in their emissions in 
the IS92a scenario implies that a decade or two into the next century, these 
gases would be contributing more than 0.1 W/m2 to the radiative forcing.

5.18 Some very long-lived greenhouse gases are also being emitted into the 
atmosphere, although still in very small amounts (e.g., sulphur hexafluoride or 
SF6 and perfluoromethane or CF4 with lifetimes of 3,200 and 50,000 years 
respectively). The long lifetimes of these gases make them very difficult to 
stabilize implying rising concentrations for centuries after steps to eliminate 
their emissions are put in place. 

5.19 Concentrations of tropospheric ozone and of tropospheric aerosols 
respond quickly to changes in the emissions of the precursors, as has been 
mentioned earlier. 

The Concept of Equivalent CO2 Concentrations and the Comprehensive 
Approach

5.20 As an illustration, let us consider the stabilization of radiative forcing due 
to all greenhouse gases, i.e., the radiative forcing due to the equivalent carbon 
dioxide concentrations of, say, 450, 550, 650 and 750 ppmv. Other choices of 
concentrations can equally well be made. For each case, we ask what level of 
concentration is required for carbon dioxide alone for stabilization, if 
simultaneously demanding that methane and nitrous oxide are either (i) 
stabilized at present levels (hereinafter referred to as "N2O and CH4 
stabilization now") or (ii) permitted to increase according to IS 92a scenario 
until 2050 and stabilize thereafter (hereinafter referred to as "N2O and CH4 
stabilization in 2050"). It is possible, then, to deduce the approximate levels of 
stabilization for carbon dioxide required for stabilizing equivalent CO2 
concentrations. These are illustrated in table 4.

5.22 It may be seen from the table that, for example, stabilization of equivalent 
carbon dioxide concentration at 450 ppmv would require a stabilization in CO2 
concentration alone at about 385 and 365 ppmv, respectively, for N2O and 
CH4 stabilization now and in 2050. Stabilization of equivalent CO2 
concentration at 550 ppmv (equal to almost a doubling of the pre-industrial 
CO2 concentration) would require a stabilization of CO2 alone at about 480 
and 455 ppmv, respectively, for N2O and CH4 stabilization now and in 2050.

TABLE 4



Stabilization level of
equivalent CO2, ppmv
450
550
650
750


Enhanced radiative
forcing, W/m2
3.2
4.4
5.4
6.2


Increase of global mean
temp. at stabilization, C

1.1-3.3

1.5-4.5

1.8-5.6

2.1-6.3


Maximum CO2
concentration for "N2O and
CH4 stabilization now"

385

480

565

650


Maximum CO2
concentration for "N2O
and CH4 stabilization in
2050"
365
455
535
610


Uncertainties in the CO2 concentrations in the table are +/- 30 ppmv. 




6.1 An extensive array of technologies and policy measures exist to mitigate 
anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in the energy, industrial, and 
agriculture sectors, and to enhance natural sinks through forestry and land 
management. The rate and degree of diffusion of the technologies will be 
influenced by fiscal and regulatory measures, additional research, and 
dissemination of information. The policy measures will be more effective if 
they are developed through consultations with various stakeholders and are 
carefully tailored to local situations. 

Energy Sector

6.2 The options for reducing energy-related emissions fall into two general 
categories: (i) those that utilize alternative energy supply technologies and (ii) 
those that reduce the demand for energy in sectors such as industry, residential/ 
commercial buildings and transportation.

Energy Supply Options

6.3 Technologies exist with potential to reduce GHG emissions substantially 
over 50-100 years. They can be developed to provide energy services at 
projected costs comparable to the projected costs of conventional sources of 
energy. Much of the world's commercial energy system will be replaced at 
least twice by the year 2100. Such replacement times provide opportunities to 
change the energy systems in the course of normal investment cycles.

6.4 In the energy supply sector, GHG emissions reductions are possible 
through the following technology options, listed in no particular order of 
priority: 

* More efficient conversion of fossil fuels New technology offers considerably 
increased conversion efficiencies. For example, the technical efficiency for 
coal-fired power generation can be increased from the present world average of 
30% to the 43% available with today's most efficient technology and to over 
60% in the longer term. Using combined-cycle gas turbines for electricity 
generation, conversion efficiency can be improved to 54% using currently 
available technology. Higher efficiencies are possible with combined heat and 
power schemes and using such schemes in district heating arrangements. 

* Increasing the use of low carbon fossil fuels and suppressing emissions 
Emissions can be reduced by switching from coal to oil to natural gas because 
natural gas contains 1.8 times as much energy as coal per unit carbon in the 
fuel. Large resources of natural gas exist in many areas. Low-capital cost, 
high-efficiency advanced combined cycle technology can reduce electricity 
costs in areas where natural gas is becoming the preferred fuel. Use of natural 
gas as a substitute for oil as a fuel in the transportation sector can be increased. 
Methane emissions from natural gas pipelines and from oil and gas wells and 
coal mines can be substantially reduced. 

* Increasing the use of renewable sources of energy Renewable energy sources 
are sufficiently abundant that eventually they could technically provide all of 
the world energy needs over the next century. In 1990, renewable sources 
contributed about 17% of the world's primary energy; of this, 2% was derived 
from solar, modern biomass, wind, geothermal and micro-hydro sources. 
Technological advances offer declining costs . In addition, renewable sources 
are often beneficial for local and regional environmental problems such as 
urban air pollution and acid rain. In the case of large-scale biomass plantations, 
established on currently non-forested lands, there is not only an increase in the 
amount of carbon sequestered, but the biomass used as fuel can replace fossil 
fuel, increasing the effective rate of carbon sequestration. Moreover, there are 
the prospects of rural income and employment generation, but these need to be 
balanced against such concerns as land use constraints, loss of biodiversity and 
natural habitats and other environmental issues. In the case of hydropower, 
most large-scale plants require dams and reservoirs, which can give rise to 
significant social and environmental concerns such as dislocation of 
populations, water diversion, slope alteration, disruptions of ecosystems, etc. 

* Decarbonization of flue gases and fuels, and CO2 Storage The removal and 
storage of CO2 from power-station stack gases, which is feasible, will 
significantly increase the production cost of electricity. Fossil fuels can be used 
to make hydrogen-rich fuels, applying conversion technologies such as fuel 
cells, but the by-product stream of CO2 will also require storage. Depleted oil 
and natural gas fields could be used for storing such CO2 at relatively low 
cost. 

* Increasing the use of nuclear energy
Nuclear energy could replace baseload fossil fuel electricity generation, if 
public concerns about reactor safety, radioactive waste disposal, and 
proliferation can be resolved. The long construction lead times and high capital 
costs make nuclear power a relatively inflexible option.

Energy Demand Options

6.5 Development of alternative sources of energy can be coupled to efforts to 
reduce existing inefficiencies in energy end-use. The technical potential for 
efficiency improvements on the demand side is large. Numerous studies have 
indicated that 10-30 % efficiency gains are feasible with current plant and 
equipment in many parts of the world at little or no cost. Using plant and 
equipment which presently yields the highest output of energy service for a 
given input of energy, efficiency gains of 50-60 % would be feasible in 
developing countries if requisite technology and financing became available.


6.6 More than a third of global CO2 emissions come from the industrial sector 
through energy use and production processes. Other greenhouse gases are also 
emitted through production processes. Basic processes including production of 
iron and steel, chemicals, building materials and food account for more than 
half of all the energy used in this sector. Industry has made substantial 
reductions in energy intensity in the past two decades. Improvements in energy 
efficiency have, in some countries, permitted major increases in production 
with little or no increase in energy use. The potential in the relative short-term 
for efficiency improvements in the manufacturing sector in the leading 
industrial nations is around 25 percent. 

6.7 Emissions reductions are feasible through other efficiency improvements 
(e.g., materials savings, co-generation and steam recovery, use of more 
efficient motors and electrical devices), recycling materials and switching to 
those with lower CO2 content, developing fundamentally new processes 
("industrial metabolism" that uses less energy), lowering of materials intensity 
in manufacturing ("dematerialization"), and feasible reductions in the emissions 
of gases such as halocarbons, CH4 and N20 in industrial proceses such as 
production of iron, steel, aluminum, ammonia, etc. The emissions reductions 
and costs associated with specific technologies or approaches in each of these 
categories will vary, according to current patterns of industrial energy and 
materials use. Some countries, for example, use twice as much energy to 
produce a unit of steel as do other countries, thus affording opportunities to 
achieve significant emissions reductions.

6.8 About 25% of global primary energy use in 1990 and 22% of CO2 
emissions from fossil fuel use came from the transportation sector. This is the 
most rapidly growing source of GHG emissions. Whereas transportation 
world-wide consumed 68 EJ (1 EJ = 1018 J) in 1990, mostly in oil products, 
this sector could account for 65-170 EJ by 2025 and 30-520 EJ by 2100 
according to the IS 92 and WEC scenarios. About 75 percent of energy use 
and greenhouse gas emissions in this sector are now in industrialized countries; 
greater growth is expected in developing countries in the future. Vehicle 
ownership and use ranges from 1.7 people per car or light truck in the USA to 
about 600 people per car in China. The nature of production and demand for 
vehicles in OECD countries influences the pattern of demand for transportation 
services throughout the world.

6.9 Two key areas in this sector provide opportunities to reduce emissions 
significantly:


 Changing the design of all vehicle types to use more efficient drive trains, 
body 
shapes and materials, as well as switching fuels for propulsion. The potential 
for reduction in energy intensity through these measures in 2025, without 
losses in vehicle performance and size, is 35-60% in cars, 20-40% in heavy 
trucks, and 30-50% in aircraft. If performance and size were changed, greater 
energy intensity reductions could be achieved. More than 95% reductions in 
GHG emissions relative to 1990 levels are feasible per unit of transport 
service, if a switch to alternative fuel and electric powered vehicles using 
renewable energy sources is coupled with the foregoing reductions in energy 
intensity. 
 Altering land-use patterns, transport systems, mobility patterns and life styles 
to 
reduce the level of passenger miles travelled and freight transport activity, and 
shifting to less energy intensive transportation modes. 

6.10 Actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from transport can 
simultaneously address other problems, including traffic congestion, high 
accident rates, noise and local air pollution including emissions of particulates, 
NOx and VOC that are precursors to tropospheric ozone. Much experience has 
already been gained in the effective use of policies such as fuel and vehicle 
taxes and fuel economy standards to encourage energy efficiency 
improvements. Research will continue to be needed to develop new propulsion 
systems and affordable, lightweight materials. 

6.11 Human settlements currently account for about one-third of GHG 
emissions. The largest portion is in the form of CO2 emissions from energy 
use in buildings; most of the remainder is in the form of methane from solid 
waste and industrial/domestic waste water. While the range in current and 
projected energy use and emissions in this sector is large, the "best guess" 
estimate is 2% growth in energy use per year (assuming continuing economic 
growth and improvements in energy efficiency), leading to a doubling of 
energy use by 2030.

6.12 Some examples of technologies that could cut projected growth in 
emissions by one-half over the next 35 years (and more in the longer run) 
without diminishing energy services include more efficient space-conditioning 
systems, reduced heat losses through walls, ceilings and windows, more 
efficient lighting and more efficient appliances (refrigerators, water heaters, 
cook stoves, etc). Other technologies that can capture, reduce, or prevent 
methane emissions (e.g., in landfills) are also increasingly available. 

6.13 Activities that provide the best opportunities for reductions in emissions 
growth in buildings are: (i) support for energy efficiency policies (energy 
pricing strategies, regulatory programs including minimum energy efficiency 
standards for buildings and appliances, utility demand-side management 
programs, and market pull and demonstration programs that stimulate the 
development and application of advanced technologies); (ii) enhanced research 
and development in energy efficiency; (iii) enhanced training and added 
support for financing of efficiency programs in developing and transitional 
economy countries.


Land Management

6.14 There are options for increasing carbon storage and/or for reducing 
emissions of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide in managed sectors 
such as agriculture and forestry. In general, mitigation options in these sectors 
focus on more sustainable uses of existing resources and have other positive 
effects such as reducing air and water pollution, slowing the rate of land 
degradation and conserving biodiversity. The mitigation potential in these 
options, however, appears insufficient to bring about reductions in emissions 
to stabilise greenhouse gas concentrations. 

6.15 Estimates of the total amount of carbon that could be sequestered in the 
forestry and agriculture sectors over the next 50 years range from 90 to 150 
GtC, which is equivalent to 8 to 40% of the projected cumulative fossil fuel 
emissions over the same period in the IS92 emission scenarios. Significant 
uncertainties are associated with estimating the amount of carbon that can thus 
be conserved and/or sequestered. They include the magnitude of the CO2 
fertilisation effect, interactions between carbon-storage potential and changes in 
temperature, precipitation and the availability of other nutrients, changes in the 
frequency of disturbances such as fires and pest outbreaks, land availability for 
forestation and regeneration programmes, lack of information about current 
land-use practices and rates at which deforestation can be reduced. 

Carbon sequestration through improved management of forests and agricultural 
lands

6.16 The categories of promising forestry activities include: (i) management 
and conservation of existing carbon in forests as for example by slowing 
deforestation; (ii) expanding carbon storage by increasing the area and/or 
carbon density of native forests; and (iii) increasing the use of forest biomass 
in products such as bio-fuels and long-lived wood products which can 
substitute for fossil-fuel intensive products. Under baseline conditions (i.e., 
today's climate and no change in the estimated availability of land over the 
period), 60 to 87 GtC could be conserved and sequestered over the period 
1995 to 2050 by slowing deforestation and promoting natural forest 
regeneration. The tropics have the potential to conserve and sequester the 
largest quantity of carbon (80 percent of the global total in the forestry sector), 
more than half of which would be due to promoting forest regeneration and 
slowing deforestation. The temperate and boreal zones could sequester about 
20 percent of the global total, mainly in North America, temperate-zone Asia, 
the former Soviet Union, China, and New Zealand. Projections of increased 
demand for agricultural land in the tropics could reduce these estimates 
significantly.

6.17 The cumulative cost, excluding land costs, to conserve and sequester the 
above amounts of carbon range from US$250 billion to $300 billion (thousand 
million) , at a unit cost ranging from $2 to $8/tonne of carbon. Realised costs 
will depend on national circumstances, including costs of land, establishment 
of infrastructure, tree nurseries, training programs and protection. Costs per 
unit of carbon sequestered or conserved generally increase from slowing 
deforestation to establishing plantations. 

6.18 In agriculture, a variety of practices could increase storage of carbon. 
Recent studies indicate that 20-30 GtC could be sequestered through improved 
management of agricultural soils, including return of crop residues and reduced 
tillage. An additional9-37 Gt C could be sequestered due to restoration of 
degraded agricultural lands and improved management of rangelands.

Reductions in methane and nitrous oxide emissions through improved 
management of agricultural practices

6.19 Emissions from the agriculture sector contribute now about one-fifth to 
overall anthropogenic emissions. This sector accounts for about 50% of 
anthropogenic methane, and about 70% of anthropogenic nitrous oxide, 
emissions. 

6.20 Significant decreases in methane emissions from agriculture can be 
achieved through improved nutrition of ruminant animals and better 
management of paddy rice fields (e.g., irrigation, nutrients, use of new 
cultivars). Further methane reductions are possible with altered treatment and 
management of animal wastes and by reducing agricultural biomass burning. 
These practices could be combined to reduce methane emissions from 
agriculture by 25 to 100 Tg/yr (estimated annual anthropogenic methane 
emissions in the 1980s were 300-450 Tg/yr). The projected increase in world 
population during the next century would imply larger, however, methane 
emissions. 

6.21 Sources of nitrous oxide in agriculture are mineral fertilisers, legume 
cropping, animal waste and biomass burning. The N2O emissions could be 
reduced by 0.3 to 0.9 Tg N/yr by improving fertiliser and manure-use 
efficiency with presently available techniques (estimated emissions in the 
1980s were 3-8 Tg/yr). 

Other benefits of mitigation options

6.22 Measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions often yield additional 
economic benefits (such as reduced traffic congestion) and/or environmental 
benefits (such as reduced emissions of urban smog precursors). What matters 
from a policy perspective is the net cost (total cost adjusted for other benefits 
and costs) of a mitigation or an adaptation option apart from its climate change 
benefits. The magnitude of these secondary benefits depends on local 
circumstances. Studies for European countries and the United States indicate 
that secondary benefits could offset 30% to 100% of abatement costs. For 
many countries and peoples there are problems which are perceived as being 
more pressing than potential climate change. These include provision of basic 
needs, and regional and local pollution. By raising efficiency and energy use, 
local and regional pollution can be curbed, and costs reduced, releasing 
financial and other resources for other needs. These are sometimes described 
as secondary benefits, although given the different local and regional priorities, 
they may in some countries well be considered primary benefits and climate 
change mitigation a valuable secondary benefit.

Barriers to Implementing Mitigation Options 

6.23 Historically, gaps have existed between the most cost-effective 
technologies available or rapidly becoming available and those actually in use. 
There are also gaps between what existing industrial plants and equipment 
should be able to achieve in terms of efficiency and what is actually being 
achieved. 

6.24 There are time lags in exploiting new technologies, because of the risk of 
financial losses, if the new technology is introduced before earlier investments 
are fully amortized. Several other factors may be even greater discouragements 
:

 uncertainty about the costs of the new technology (operating and maintenance 
costs, reliability and training in of new skills) and the level of service provided; 
 uncertainty about the long-term prices, lack of information, poor decision 
processes, imperfect market structures, institutional deficiencies including 
restrictive government regulations and property tenure; 
 the status of economic and cultural development; 
 the motivation for innovation, which is ultimately determined by prevailing 
incentive systems that are often based on societal values other than the risk of 
climate change.

Addressing Barriers

6.25 Many policy instruments are available to facilitate the penetration of lower 
carbon intensity technologies and modified consumption patterns. They include 
energy pricing strategies, e.g., carbon or energy taxes and reduced energy 
subsidies, incentives such as provisions for accelerated depreciation and 
reduced cost for the consumers, tradable emission permits, reduction of market 
imperfections, negotiated agreements with industry, new standards and 
product labelling and increased support for research and development. (See 
chapter 11 of the contribution of Working Group III to the IPCC Second 
Assessment Report for more detailed analyses of the advantages and 
disadvantages of such instruments.)

6.26 The optimal mix of policy instruments will vary from country to country 
depending upon political structure and societal receptiveness. It will also vary 
between economic sectors and on whether or not there is a tradition of 
negotiated agreements between government and industry.

6.27 The best combination of policies will also vary over time. Studies indicate 
that high priority should initially be given to the removal of existing barriers, to 
the implementation of best available technologies, elimination of barriers due to 
existing investments in raw materials, processes and products, vested interests, 
institutional inertia and lack of information and awareness. The longer-run 
costs of abatement can be reduced by improved price signals, research and 
development and emphasis on effective information programmes.

6.28 No significant shift in technical consumption patterns towards low-
emitting products and services is likely if relative prices do not encourage it. 
The impact of price signals, whether achieved through taxes or incentives or 
tradable permits, will ultimately depend on:


 continuity of the policy, including confidence in its long-run stability, 
prevention of 
"free riders", and progressiveness in implementation; 
 the way in which revenues arising from the price signals are recycled in the 
economy.

6.29 The use of taxes to alter market prices requires careful consideration in 
order to avoid market distortions and decreasing economic efficiency, which 
could negate the overall impact of climate change policies. On the other hand, if 
the proceeds of a carbon tax are used to reduce other taxes which have a 
distortionary impact on labour and capital, an effective use of the tax might be 
achieved.. Such a move might simultaneously help to reduce long-term 
concerns about climate change with concern about unemployment and public 
expenditure levels and their allocation. 

Combining Mitigation Options

6.30 Each of the technologies and measures discussed above has the potential 
to contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions and the enhancement of GHG 
sinks. Evaluating the effectiveness of these individual options is relatively 
straightforward. However, understanding the overall effectiveness of 
combinations of these options to reduce energy demand and increase use of 
energy resources with lower emissions requires development and evaluation of 
an integrated mitigation strategy. There is no unique path to realization of deep 
emissions reductions. 

6.31 Several modelling experiments suggest that achieving deep reductions in 
emissions is possible at low cost over the long term. However, it is not 
possible to identify a least-cost future energy system for the longer term, as the 
relative costs of options depend on resource constraints, technological 
opportunities that are imperfectly known and on actions to be taken by 
governments and the private sector. Published estimates of the cost of 
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and increasing carbon sequestration vary 
substantially. Despite significant progress in reconciling methodological and 
technical differences concerning model structures and data, major differences 
concerning underlying assumptions remain. These differences reflect 
alternative perspectives about such factors as the efficiency of energy markets, 
distortions in fiscal systems, availability of new technologies and the costs o 
implementation.







7.1 Article 2 provides the framework for international cooperation in decision-
making to address climate change. Article 3 sets out a number of principles for 
the implementation of the provisions of the Convention including Article 2. 

7.2 Climate change presents the decision-maker with a formidable set of 
challenges: 
 very long planning horizon;

 large uncertainties;

 wide regional variations in causes, potential impacts - positive and negative - 
and costs;

 many greenhouse gases involving many sectors of societies. Yet another 
challenge is that the atmosphere is an international public good in that all 
countries are affected by each country's greenhouse gas emissions. Decisions 
in the short term should be taken with the long-term perspective in mind and 
vice versa. 

7.3 These challenges have several characteristics that affect the decision 
making process:


 Long time scales of relevance suggest the need for early decision-making: (a) 
from emissions of greenhouse gases to the response of the climate system, (b) 
for adaptation of the ecosystems and natural resource systems to climate 
change, (c) for the climate system to come to equilibrium once greenhouse gas 
concentrations are stabilized, (d) for turnover of infrastructure and capital in the 
energy, industrial, transport and commercial/residential buildings sectors; and 
(e) the nature of international and national political processes. 
 While knowledge about climate change, its potential effects, and the 
advantages 
and disadvantages of various responses is increasing, there are still critical 
uncertainties regarding basic scientific and socio-economic issues. These 
uncertainties make it difficult to assess the risks posed by anthropogenic 
climate change, and increase the costs of insurance and new infrastructure. 
 Some potential impacts of climate change, such as loss of biological diversity 
and 
land, are irreversible. Some other impacts may be disproportionate to the 
changes in climate because of likely thresholds. 
 Impacts and the costs of mitigation and adaptation will vary both within and 
among countries raising issues of intranational and international equity. 
Perceived equity is an important element for legitimizing decisions and 
promoting cooperation.

 Sustainable development is often defined as "meeting the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs". Because future generations are not able to influence directly the actions 
taken that will affect their well-being, climate change raises issues of inter-
generational equity. These issues are generally addressed through the choice of 
a discount rate. Making the choice is a question of values, a profound ethical 
question, since the choice inherently compares the costs of present measures 
against possible damages suffered by future generations if no action is taken. 
 Economic efficiency requires that emission reductions occur where their cost 
is 
lowest, irrespective of who bears the financial burden. For purposes of 
analysis, it is useful to separate efficiency (what to do and how it is done) from 
equity (who bears the burden) considerations. This analytical separation can be 
implemented in practice only if effective institutions exist or can be created for 
appropriate redistribution of climate change costs.

 Measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and increase sinks can yield 
multiple additional benefits (e.g., rural employment generation, reduced traffic 
congestion, reduced emissions of urban smog precursors). The magnitude of 
these other benefits depends on local circumstances. When other priorities such 
as provision of basic needs or reducing regional or local pollution are perceived 
to be more important, actions taken to address them are generally likely to 
advance the goal of greenhouse gas mitigation simultaneously. 
 Radiative forcing of climate warming is caused by anthropogenic emissions of 
other greenhouse gases in addition to CO2. Cooling due to anthropogenic 
aerosols should also be taken into account. To achieve stabilization of all 
greenhouse gas concentrations, the concept of equivalent CO2 can be used. It 
is possible to increase the efficiency of strategies to stabilize concentrations by 
reducing initially the emissions of those gases which have the lowest marginal 
costs of control.

7.4 A stabilization objective could be based upon a benefit-cost analysis, a 
cost-effectiveness approach or an absolute standard. Benefit-cost analysis or 
trade-off analysis attempts to identify the most efficient climate change strategy 
by balancing the costs of mitigation and adaptation measures against the 
damages avoided by these measures, including non-market costs such as 
damage to ecosystems or loss of species.

7.5 A cost-effectiveness approach would begin with a maximum atmospheric 
concentration of greenhouse gases, based on an assessment of the risks 
associated with different concentrations and the costs of achieving those 
concentrations. The objective would be reach the specified target at the lowest 
total cost, including non-market costs. 


7.6 An absolute standard approach would define a maximum atmospheric 
concentration of greenhouse gases that is considered to constitute "dangerous 
anthropogenic interference with the climate system" on the basis of predicted 
biophysical impacts of climate change, independent of the economic and social 
impacts of achieving this concentration. Economists generally reject the 
absolute standard approach, believing that trade-offs are always relevant. At 
the same time, it is recognized that many governments set policies on the basis 
of underlying legislation that is itself based on an absolute standard. Even 
under the absolute standard approach, mitigation and adaptation measures 
should be chosen to achieve the standard at least cost. 

7.7 Given the interrelated nature of the global economic system, attempts to 
mitigate climate change through actions in one region or sector may have 
offsetting effects which increase emissions from other regions or sectors. 
These emission reduction leakages can be reduced through coordinated actions 
of groups of countries. 

Considerations for moving towards the ultimate objective 

7.8 Article 2 of the Convention introduces several specific considerations to be 
taken into account in moving towards stabilization of GHG concentrations. 
The ability of ecosystems to adapt naturally depends critically on the rate of 
climate change. Analyses suggest that in some regions significant reductions in 
food security may occur but that global food production may not be seriously 
threatened. Thus, with free, fair and unrestricted trade, food security is 
unlikely to be threatened by the risks of climate change due to a greenhouse 
warming. Economic development may not be able to proceed in a sustainable 
manner in those areas where climate change could worsen existing water and 
food shortages, public health concerns and exposure to natural disasters.

7.9 A number of levels for stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations have 
been explored in the scientific literature. While some effects of different levels 
can be identified or inferred from this literature (for example, a rate of global 
mean temperature increase of 0.1 C per decade may result in significant loss of 
species from forest and montane ecosystems), there is not enough information 
to specify completely the consequences of various concentrations or emissions 
pathways for ecosystems, food production, or sustainable development.

7.10 Nonetheless, a number of observations of relevance to policymaking can 
be made about stabilization and potential options to achieve it: 
 The impacts of stabilizing at a level of 750 ppmv (of equivalent CO2, implying 
a 
value for CO2 alone close to thrice its pre-industrial concentration) or higher 
are outside documented past fluctuations in greenhouse gas concentrations and 
climate and associated impacts;

 In order to achieve stabilization near or below 750 ppmv, emissions will have 
to 
fall substantially below those of the IPCC IS92a emissions scenario within the 
next few decades. Higher initial emissions would require more drastic 
reductions later to achieve stabilization;

 Stabilizing concentrations at any of the levels illustrated in this discussion 
requires initiation of near term measures including: (i) research and 
development on energy efficiency improvements, alternative sources of 
energy, and strategies to accelerate diffusion of new technologies into the 
market place; (ii) policies to encourage replacement of long-lived energy, 
transportation and industrial infrastructure in normal investment cycles with 
plant and equipment that provides the highest amount of service and the lowest 
level of greenhouse gas emissions per unit of input energy and materials; (iii) 
research and monitoring to promote a better understanding of the climate 
system and the impacts of climate variability; and (iv) action of other measures 
with multiple benefits and negative or low cost. Such measures would begin 
the process of moving towards eventual stabilization while further information 
is developed; 
 Delaying action might conceivably reduce the overall costs of mitigation, but 
would increase both the rate and the eventual magnitude of climate change, and 
hence the adaptation and damage costs.

7.11 "No regrets" measures are those whose benefits, such as reduced energy 
costs and lower emissions of local and regional pollutants, equal or exceed 
their cost to society, excluding the benefits of mitigation of climate change. 
Such "no regrets" mitigation and adaptation measures would appear justified 
on technical grounds unrelated to the risks of rapid climate change due to 
greenhouse gases. The expectation of net damages from climate change and the 
precautionary principle provide a rationale for going beyond "no regrets".

7.12 A sequential decision-making approach offers a prudent strategy that can 
be adjusted in the light of new information and could take into account factors 
such as future flexibility and current and future costs. Near term decisions 
along an optimal path (i.e., modest cost mitigation measures) will be the same 
for a wide range of ultimate stabilization concentrations (see chapter 5 also). 

7.13 A broad portfolio of actions aimed at mitigation, adaptation and reducing 
uncertainties through further research provides a balanced approach to 
managing the risks of anthropogenic climate change. The appropriate portfolio 
will differ from country to country. A well-chosen portfolio of climate change 
investments will yield greater benefit for a given cost than any one option 
undertaken by itself. 

</pre>



</DOC>