
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B39-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA060-000326-B015-346</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi20.html 205.156.212.5 19970115013204 text/html 59946
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:30:08 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:49:04 GMT
Content-length: 59757
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi20.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
S&P'S REV. OF SEC. & COMMODITIES REGS. via NewsNet <BR>
January 24, 1996   Vol. 29, N<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>THE DUTY TO RESPOND</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(5129 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>ASSET CONCENTRATION ISSUES IN REAL ESTATE SECURITIZATIONS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3856 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
S&P'S REV. OF SEC. & COMMODITIES REGS. via NewsNet
January 24, 1996   Vol. 29, N

THE DUTY TO RESPOND

The SEC Has Issued Two Reports on Management's Duty To Respond to Employee
Misconduct. A Company That Meaningfully Investigates Alleged Misconduct,
Ensures That It Will Not Be Repeated, and Appropriately Sanctions the
Wrongdoer Will Be Judged More Leniently than the Errant Employee.

By:
John K. Carroll*

Traditionally, the government has exercised its discretion over whether to
punish a public company for the misconduct of its officers or employees
based upon several factors: the seniority of the officer or employee
involved; the degree to which the company benefited from the misconduct,
the vulnerability of the victims; the extent of harm inflicted; and, to a
lesser degree, the foreseeability of the misconduct. The consequence of
basing prosecutorial discretion on this mix of factors has been to leave
companies -- and their innocent shareholders -- at the mercy of errant
employees. By the time a company learns of the misconduct, it may already
be too late to avoid governmental punishment.
In recent actions, the Securities and Exchange Commission (the ``SEC'') has
indicated strongly that a new factor should be added to this mix. The SEC
has made clear that it will calibrate corporate punishment based on the
steps taken by a company, through its board and senior management, on
learning of alleged employee misconduct. In so doing, the SEC has
delineated a ``duty to respond,'' i.e., the responsibility of senior
management to investigate, deter, and punish employee and management
misconduct. This duty to respond imposes new obligations on companies
confronted with employee misconduct. In a realistic sense, it promises that
a company's punishment, if any, will depend on the knowing and intentional
conduct of its managers.
   In two reports, one issued at the end of last year, the SEC specifically
addressed the duty to respond to employee misconduct.1 A public company
whose management meets this duty can argue compellingly that it should be
judged separately from its errant employees and should be treated
leniently.2 Managers who fail to respond will be criticized and sanctioned.
Indeed, a lackadaisical management response may amplify a company's
exposure and even jeopardize its viability. This article will review the
Cooper and Gutfreund reports and examine the three steps required to
fulfill the duty to respond articulated in those reports.
THE COOPER COMPANIES
Background
In November 1992, a grand jury in the Southern District of New York
returned a 24-count indictment against the Cooper Companies, Inc. and Gary
Singer, Cooper's chief executive officer.3 In substance, the indictment
charged Singer in two fraudulent schemes relating to his position as CEO of
Cooper. The first scheme, which involved front-running, benefited both
Singer and Cooper. As set forth in the indictment, Singer was tipped by the
manager of a high-yield mutual fund with information regarding the
securities the manager intended to purchase for the portfolio. Singer
profited by going into the market ahead of the fund, purchasing bonds for
accounts he controlled, including Cooper accounts, and reselling the bonds
to the fund at a profit. In return, Singer caused payments to be made by
Cooper to the manager.
   Singer's second scheme directly victimized Cooper. Singer caused Cooper
to sell high-yield bonds at below-market prices from Cooper's position to
Singer and his family. Singer and his family then resold these bonds in the
market at a profit. Singer failed to disclose these related-party
transactions on internal Cooper questionnaires circulated among the
company's management.
   Cooper Company itself was indicted as a participant in Singer's first
scheme, even though the company was the direct victim of Singer's second
scheme and its shareholders were the direct or indirect victims of all of
Singer's misconduct. Simultaneous with the filing of the indictment, the
SEC filed a civil action against Cooper, Singer, and his brother Steven
Singer arising out of the same series of transactions.4
   On January 13, 1994, following a jury trial, Singer was found guilty in
connection with each of the schemes.5 The company was also convicted in
connection with the front-running scheme. Eleven months later, on December
12, 1994, the SEC settled its civil charges against Cooper. As a part of
that settlement, the company agreed to be permanently enjoined from further
violations of specified sections of the securities laws, and from any
further employment of Gary or Steven Singer. In addition, Cooper was
ordered to disgorge $1.4 million plus interest, and to pay a civil penalty
of $1.15 million. The settlement permitted Cooper to offset these payments
against fines and restitution and interest payments made in connection with
the criminal conviction.6
The Board's Failure to Respond
The charges against Cooper in both the indictment and the SEC complaint
represent starkly the inherent paradox when a fraud charge is brought
against not only an employee but a public company itself. Why should
innocent shareholders suffer the financial consequences of their company's
indictment for the misconduct of an employee, albeit the chief executive
officer? This issue is especially germane to the Cooper case because the
company and its shareholders were the direct and intended victims of much
of Singer's misconduct. In its recent report, the SEC answered that
question by sharply criticizing Cooper's board for failing to respond to
its knowledge of Singer's misconduct. The board's failure is worth
discussing at length.
   As discussed in the report, Cooper's directors were first notified of
alleged misconduct by Singer in January 1992, when the SEC issued a Formal
Order of Investigation of the Cooper Company.7 The board responded to the
SEC notice by disclosing the pendency of the investigation in the company's
form 10-K filed at the end of January. There is no indication that the
board took any other action in response to the subpoena.
   In early February 1992, the gap between the interests of the company and
those of the Singers widened. In response to SEC questioning, both Singers
asserted their Fifth Amendment privilege and declined to testify. At the
time he invoked his privilege, Gary Singer was Cooper's CEO and Steven
Singer was acting chief operating officer. Gary Singer had the authority to
trade in the company's securities accounts. Steven Singer was formally
elected COO just days following his refusal to testify.
   In March, after being formally advised that the company was being
investigated by the U.S. Attorney's office, the board authorized an
internal investigation by independent counsel. The board was subsequently
informed that independent counsel was unable to interview either Singer
brother. The investigation did reveal, however, that Gary Singer had
diverted $600,000 in trading profits from the company to personal and
family accounts.8
   The government investigation continued, and in May charges were filed
against the two men who participated in the front-running scheme with Gary
and Steven Singer. In connection with his guilty plea, one of these men
identified Gary Singer as a co-conspirator. Although the board was aware of
these developments, it took no action in response. Subsequently, Steven
Singer caused the company to issue a press release in which the company
denied knowledge of any wrongdoing on the part of management. Although this
was clearly false, the board took no action.
   Until the end of May when he agreed to take a leave of absence, Gary
Singer continued in his capacity as CEO. Even after his departure, the
board approved the continuation of his pay and benefits and authorized the
relocation of his offices. The company issued a press release about his
leave of absence that included a denial by Singer that he had participated
in any illegal activity. This press release was also the first public
disclosure of Gary and Steven Singer's refusal to testify before the SEC or
to cooperate in the Company's internal investigation.
   During the late summer and fall of 1992, Gary and Steven Singer
continued to participate in the business of the company. Gary Singer
attended board meetings, was present at the company's headquarters, and
continued to have contact with the company's securities brokers. Steven
Singer was re-elected as COO in late July. It was not until November 1992
that the board finally determined that additional supervision of Steven
Singer was needed in light of his assertion of the Fifth Amendment in his
January testimony.
   The 21(a) Report
The SEC unsparingly criticized the board's failure to respond to the
allegations of the Singers' misconduct. As the Commission reported,
Cooper's board had an affirmative obligation to act; by not acting, it
failed to meet its duties. The Commission explained that it is
[e]ssential for board members to move aggressively to fulfill their
responsibilities to oversee the conduct and performance of management and
to ensure that the company's public statements are candid and complete.
   In this case, Cooper's Board failed to satisfy its obligations when
confronted with serious indications of management fraud. After the Board
learned that a member of senior management had concealed fraudulent
self-dealing transactions and thereby caused the company's outstanding
reports to be inaccurate, the Board failed to take immediate and effective
action to protect the interests of the company's investors. The Board's
inaction allowed a second corporate officer, who himself was allegedly
involved in the fraudulent front-running scheme, to direct the issuance of
a press release on behalf of the company falsely denying any knowledge of
wrongdoing. By failing to take immediate and decisive corrective action on
these matters, the Cooper Board appeared to prefer management's interest in
keeping the facts secret over the investors' interest in full, fair, and
accurate disclosure under the federal securities laws.9
   The consequence of the board's inaction was dramatic. By aligning
Cooper's interests with the Singers' fate, the board nullified its chances
of receiving lenient treatment from the government. Indeed, the indictment
of Cooper, in spite of its status as victim in one of Gary Singer's
schemes, can be traced directly to the board's failure to respond
appropriately to the allegations of employee misconduct.
GUTFREUND
The Failure to Respond
The facts relating to misconduct on the government trading desk at Salomon
Brothers in 1991 have been rehearsed thoroughly.10 The details of
management's failure to respond to that misconduct are particularly
instructive when considered along with the Cooper matter.
   In late April 1991, John H. Gutfreund, Thomas W. Strauss, and John W.
Meriwether, three members of Salomon's most senior management, learned that
Paul Mozer, the head of the firm's government trading desk, had submitted a
false bid in an auction of Treasury securities. Promptly upon learning of
the false bid, these three senior managers and Donald M. Feuerstein,
Salomon's chief legal officer, convened and discussed Mozer's misconduct.
They concluded that Mozer's misconduct should be reported to the
government. Nevertheless, they did not even discuss ``investigating what
Mozer had done disciplining him, or placing limits on his
activities.''11
   Salomon's supervisors compounded this failure by not acting on their
decision to self-report for more than three months. In the interim, Mozer
committed additional violations of the securities laws. In early July 1991,
Salomon retained outside counsel to investigate a separate allegation of
misconduct relating to the government trading desk. In the course of that
investigation, Feuerstein disclosed Mozer's earlier misconduct to counsel.
Thereafter, counsel widened its inquiry and uncovered additional
auction-related misconduct.
   In August 1991, four months after concluding that Mozer had engaged in
substantial misconduct, Salomon finally suspended Mozer and three others
and publicly disclosed that it had uncovered irregularities on its
government trading desk. Within days, Gutfreund, Strauss, Meriwether, and
Feuerstein resigned their positions.
The Commission's Criticism
The Securities Exchange Act imposes upon broker-dealers a specific duty to
supervise that does not explicitly apply to other public companies.12
Failure to meet supervisory obligations can serve as a basis for
sanctioning individuals as well as the broker-dealer itself. Gutfreund,
Strauss, and Meriwether each were sternly punished for their failure to
supervise.13
Although section 15 reaches only broker-dealers and the employees of
broker-dealers, it would be naive for any public company to ignore the
clear duty to respond set forth in Gutfreund:14
   The supervisory obligations imposed by the federal securities laws
require a vigorous response even to indications of wrongdoing. Many of the
Commission's cases involving a failure to supervise arise from situations
where supervisors were aware only of ``red flags'' or ``suggestions'' of
irregularity, rather than situations where, as here, supervisors were
explicitly informed of an illegal act.
   Even where the knowledge of supervisors is limited to ``red flags'' or
``suggestions'' of irregularity, they cannot discharge their supervisory
obligations simply by relying on the unverified representations of
employees. Instead, as the Commission has repeatedly emphasized, [t]here
must be adequate follow-up and review when a firm's own procedures detect
irregularities or unusual trading activity.'' Moreover, if more than one
supervisor is involved in considering the actions to be taken in response
to possible misconduct, there must be clear definition of the efforts to be
taken and a clear assignment of those responsibilities to specific
individuals within the firm.
   In Gutfreund, the Commission upbraided Salomon's managers for their
failure to investigate responsibly ``what had occurred and whether there
had been other instances of unreported misconduct.'' Until that inquiry was
complete, Salomon should have increased supervision of Mozer and
appropriately limited his activities.
   Another precedent, In the Matter of the Boston Company, Inc., provides a
stark and encouraging contrast to the results in Gutfreund. There the
Commission lightly sanctioned Boston Co.'s management because, in the
Commission's view, it had met its obligations under the duty to respond. As
set forth in the Commission's report, Boston Co. used improper accounting
practices and, as a result, overstated its income by $44 million for the
first three quarters of 1988. As a result, Boston Co.'s parent, Shearson
Lehman Brothers, overstated its income for the same period.15
A portion of the overstatement resulted from the improper characterization
of certain income and expenses, done at the direction of ``certain''
company officers. Citing the exemplary response of management from both
companies, including the firing of Boston Co.'s CEO, the institution of
internal controls, and cooperation with the SEC, the Commission issued a
simple ``cease and desist'' order against Boston Co. and took no action
against Shearson.16 According to one news report of the settlement, the
Commission chose leniency over the stiffer sanctions recommended by its
enforcement staff because of management's response upon the discovery of
misconduct.
THE DUTY TO RESPOND
With the Cooper and Gutfreund cases, the Commission has imposed upon the
senior managers of public companies the obligation to ``take immediate and
decisive corrective action'' when ``confronted with serious indications of
management fraud.'' In practice, this duty to respond requires that, upon
learning of allegations of misconduct, management and the board (i)
investigate the allegations to determine whether they are substantial, (ii)
take steps to deter repetition of any misconduct, and (iii) if warranted,
sanction the employees involved.
   This duty does not necessarily require that a company report its
findings to the government,17 although such a duty may arise from another
source.18 Alternatively, the company may also determine that the benefits
of self-reporting exceed the almost certain costs.19
In sum, Cooper and Gutfreund should be read to impose a duty to act rather
than wait for government reaction. The company is obligated to investigate,
make a determination, and act based on that determination. It is important
to note that the duty to respond is not an obligation to accede to every
government allegation of misconduct. Rather, the duty is met when
management can answer a regulator's questions by stating, ``We responsibly
investigated the alleged misconduct and took the actions that we deemed
appropriate based upon that responsible investigation.''20
Meaningful Investigation
When management reasonably suspects that an employee has engaged in
misconduct that has brought a benefit to the company, the company should
conduct a meaningful investigation of the misconduct. The scope of a
meaningful investigation differs with the situation, but it always includes
two steps. The company must first review relevant company documents and
then interview current employees with access to relevant information. If
these two steps are not completed, company management will have failed in
its duty to respond and both management and the company will face increased
jeopardy of being charged.
   A meaningful investigation can be completed by internal counsel,
accounting, business, or compliance personnel. Conducting a review
internally does raise certain risks, however. A review conducted by
non-legal personnel will not be protected from discovery by the
attorney-client privilege.21 Similarly, review should never be conducted by
personnel who had even tangential connection to the conduct under review.
Where an employee is both a fact witness and an investigator, the
likelihood that the results of the internal investigation will be disclosed
increases greatly.22 At the same time, internal counsel may not have
sufficient perspective to conduct an arm's-length review and the friction
generated by an internal inquiry can limit the ability of internal counsel
to conduct his or her day-to-day advisory duties.
   No hard and fast rule governs whether and when employees should be
invited to retain their own counsel.23 Typically, independent employee
counsel is not used at the beginning of an investigation. At such an early
stage, the company does not know whether the employee's interests have
diverged from the company's. The employee must be fully informed, however,
that counsel is representing the company, not him or her personally.24 The
investigating counsel should specifically advise the employee that the
results of his or her interview will be used in the company's best
interests and that the company controls the use of interview notes or
memoranda. Such use may include disclosure to the government if the company
later determines to waive its own privilege.
   Separate representation is advisable when and if the employee's
interests are no longer co-extensive with the company's. A strong employee
defense benefits the company since the company may be vicariously liable
for the employee's wrongful conduct.25 By retaining separate employee
counsel, a company can present a separate face to an investigating
regulator or prosecutor. For example, if the company chooses to adopt a
conciliatory posture, employee counsel will be able to defend aggressively
a position that company counsel could not advocate. Finally, internal
inquiries strain company morale. Some of that strain may be mitigated if
employees perceive that the company will support their separate defense.
   Regardless of whether the company provides employee defense,
management's primary obligation is to ensure that employees central to the
inquiry are interviewed. The employee, no matter what his or her level of
management, cannot be permitted to refuse to speak with the company's
investigators. As the Cooper matter makes clear, failure to interview the
central subjects in an internal inquiry results in the unification of
interests -- and outcomes -- for the company and the individual.26 Where
the employee did not act wrongfully, such an identity of interests is
appropriate; where the employee did act wrongfully, the company must
separate its interests from the individual's. The only way a company can
make that evaluation is by learning the facts. A company that must concede
to a regulator or prosecutor that it failed to interview the central
subject has forfeited its ability to argue compellingly that it should be
viewed differently from an errant employee.
   Ultimately, the company's obligation is to inquire into a situation
thoroughly enough to determine whether wrongful conduct occurred. Cooper
stands for the proposition that a company is obliged to reach its own
independent conclusions and act based upon those conclusions rather than
postpone that responsibility by waiting for a regulator, prosecutor, or
court to reach judgment.27 A regulator expects the company to accept the
responsibility of supervising employee conduct rather than demurring and
relying upon government action.28
Ensuring That It Will Not Happen Again
The Gutfreund matter likely would have been more containable had management
promptly inquired into Mozer's prior conduct upon first learning of the
false bid. Instead, the company's exposure increased dramatically when
misconduct on the treasury desk repeated itself after management's initial
discovery. In effect, Salomon lost its ability to argue convincingly that
it had been deceived by its own employee. By failing to take corrective
steps, management allowed misconduct to happen on management's watch.29
A company discovering employee misconduct must act to ensure that such
misconduct will not happen again. Often corrective steps may involve no
more than increased supervision. Pre-clearing employee activity by an
immediate supervisor frequently fulfills this need.
   On occasion, more is required. Counsel may recommend that new business
or compliance policies be adopted. The company may determine during the
course of its investigation that it wants to change the way it pursues a
particular business or exit that business entirely. Particularly where
class action or shareholder suits loom a company may determine that
business practices should change.
Internal Sanctions
The internal review may reveal that the employee has acted wrongfully. The
company must act on this information. In the most extreme circumstances, an
employee may have to be terminated and/or reported to a regulator. More
often, the appropriate sanction will be a change in job responsibilities or
title or a reduction in bonus or some other economic penalty.
   By acting decisively, the company not only strengthens its argument that
it should be judged separately from the employee, it also gains credibility
in the government's investigative process. By appropriately sanctioning an
employee who has acted wrongfully, the company bolsters its ability to
argue that another employee acted correctly. The company in effect
validates its vote on the conduct of the employees it will aggressively
defend.
   Companies in a regulated industry engage in a constant dialogue with
their regulators. How a company acts in one circumstance will condition the
regulator's expectation in the next. A company that is not perceived as
accepting the responsibility of self-regulation will have difficulty
convincing the government that its fate should be considered separately
from the fate of the employee in trouble.


About the Author(s):

*JOHN K. CARROLL is a partner with Rogers & Wells, and was a former
assistant U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York. KELLY P.
WILSON, an associate at Rogers & Wells, contributed to the preparation of
this article.

Reference(s):

1. See Report of Investigation in the Matter of the Cooper Companies,
Inc. as It Related to the Conduct of Cooper's Board of Directors, Exch. Act
Rel. No. 34-35082 (Dec. 12, 1994) (``Cooper''); In the Matter of Gutfreund,
Strauss and Meriwether, Exch. Act Rel. No. 34-31554, [1992 Transfer Binder]
Fed. Sec. L. Rep. (CCH) 85067 (Dec. 3, 1992) (``Gutfreund'').
2. See In the Matter of The Boston Company, Inc., Exch. Act Rel. No.
34-31822 (Feb. 4, 1993); nn. 15-16, infra and accompanying text.
3. Indictment, U.S. v. Gary Singer, et al., (SDNY, filed Nov. 10,
1992)(RJW)(92-964).
4. Complaint, S.E.C. v. The Cooper Companies, et al., (SDNY, filed
Nov. 10, 1992)(JFK)(92-8166). The SEC complaint also alleged a third
scheme: that Singer engaged in manipulative trading to raise the price of
an outstanding series of Cooper bonds to avoid the reset provision
incorporated in the bonds' indentures. The reset provision provided that if
the bonds were not trading at 75 percent of their face value on the reset
date, a higher interest rate would kick in. To avoid this provision, Singer
caused Cooper Company to purchase a substantial number of the outstanding
bonds just before reset date to buoy the price, and also caused two small
brokerage firms with which Cooper was affiliated to opine falsely that the
value of the bonds was below the reset trigger. Id., 70-96.
5. See indictment and docket, U.S. v. Gary Singer, et al., n. 3
supra.
6. Final Judgment (On Consent) of Permanent Injunction and Other
Relief, S.E.C. v. Cooper Companies, et al., n. 4 supra.
7. Cooper, n. 1 supra, at 3.
8. Id. at 4. The transactions were disclosed in a form 8 and a proxy
statement, both filed in June 1992.
9. Id. at 7.
10. See e.g., Jonathan Fuerbringer, Salomon Brothers Admits Violations
at Treasury Sales, N.Y. Times, Aug. 10, 1991, at 1; Michael Siconolfi, et
al., The Big Squeeze: Salomon's Admission of T-Note Infractions Give Market
a Jolt, Wall St. J., Aug. 12, 1991, at A1; Barnaby J. Feder, Salomon
Violations Detailed, N.Y. Times, Aug. 15, 1991, at D1; Laurie Cohen and
Michael Siconolfi, Salomon Reveals It Had Control of 94% of Notes at May
Auction, Wall St. J., Sept. 5, 1991, at C1.
11. See Gutfreund, n. 1 supra, at 83,601.
12. See 15 U.S.C. 78o(b)(4)(E) (1988).
13. Gutfreund, n. 1 supra, at 83,609. Gutfreund was permanently barred
from serving as Chairman or CEO of any securities company and fined
$100,000; Meriwether was suspended from associating with any securities
company for six months and fined $75,000; Strauss was suspended from
associating with any securities company for three months and fined
$50,000.
14. Id. at 83,606 (footnotes omitted). Indeed, it may be argued that
the availability of a Section 15 remedy in the broker-dealer context
alleviates the pressure to seek vicarious punishment of the institution
predicated upon the misconduct of the employee. Inevitably, the Section 15
remedy separates the conduct of the institution and its supervisors from
that of errant employees. Where a separate remedy is unavailable, the
distinction between the interests of the institution and the interests of
the errant employee may become muddied.
15. In the Matter of The Boston Company, Inc., Exch. Act Rel. No.
34-31822 (Feb. 4, 1993).
16. Id. See also Gary Putka, SEC Settles Case against Boston Co. With
Mild Sanctions, Wall St. J., Feb. 4, 1993, at B3.
17. Cf. U.S. v. Matthews, 787 F.2d 38 (2d Cir. 1986)(reversing a
conviction for failure to disclose in a proxy statement participation in a
bribery conspiracy); GAF v. Heyman, 724 F.2d 727 (2d Cir. 1983)(finding
that director's failure to disclose in a proxy statement that he was being
sued for breach of trust in unrelated action was not a material omission);
Ciresi v. Citicorp, 782 F.Supp. 819, 823 (SDNY 1991), aff'd 956 F.2d 1161
(2d Cir. 1992)(holding that bank management had no duty to disclose in a
proxy statement ``uncharged, unadjudicated wrongdoing or mismanagement''
(citing Matthews)).

    In Matthews, the defendant was acquitted of conspiracy to bribe
state tax officials, but he was convicted for failing to disclose in a
proxy statement his participation in the same conspiracy. The Second
Circuit reversed the conviction and ordered the indictment dismissed,
citing self-incrimination concerns as well as the absence of any legal
obligation to disclose uncharged criminal conduct. 787 F.2d at 49-50.
18. See e.g., NYSE Guide (CCH) 2351 (Exchange rule requiring members
and member organizations to report to the Exchange certain employee
misconduct or allegations thereof).
19. See, e.g., USSG 8C2.5(g) (permitting a downward departure from the
guidelines for organizations that opt to self-report).
20. Indeed, the results of a company's self-examination may lead to the
conclusion that the best course of action is not to capitulate to the
government's demands. Following an internal investigation into criminal
allegations of price-fixing in the industrial diamond market by high-level
employees at General Electric, the company refused to negotiate any deals
with the government that included a guilty plea. The case proceeded to
trial, and was dismissed on December 5, 1994 in a rare grant of a rule 29
motion for judgment of acquittal. See William W. Horne, GE Crushes the
Trustbusters, The American Lawyer, Jan.-Feb. 1995, at 57.
21. See e.g., In re Grand Jury Subpoena dated December 19, 1978, 599
F.2d 504, 510 (2d Cir. 1979), rejecting a privilege claim asserted over the
product of an internal investigation conducted by corporate officers, while
upholding the privilege for material prepared during the course of a
separate investigation conducted by outside counsel.
22. See In re Six Grand Jury Witnesses, 979 F.2d 939 (2d Cir. 1992)
cert. denied subnom Xyz Corp. v. U.S., 113 S.Ct. 2997 (1993), in which
defendant corporation, upon learning it was the target of a criminal
investigation relating to its performance under federal contracts,
conducted an internal investigation using employees who had been
responsible for supervising costs under the contracts at issue. The
employees were subpoenaed to testify for the grand jury, where they refused
to answer certain questions based on their employer's assertion of
privilege. The court held that while communications between corporate
counsel and these employees were privileged, their knowledge of the
underlying facts was not. Moreover, the defendants did not identify what
information requested would constitute ``mental impressions'' of the
witnesses which would be protected by the ``work product'' privilege. The
court directed the prosecution to rephrase certain questions to omit
references to attorney communications, and ordered the witnesses to answer.
Id. at 944-45.

    Note that since only information received in the individual's role
as counsel is privileged, in-house counsel with personal knowledge of the
actions under investigation may have difficulty distinguishing between
privileged information and information not subject to the attorney-client
privilege.
23. See Model Rules of Professional Conduct, rule 1.13(e) (1983) (dual
representation of corporate client and its employees permitted where rule
1.7, governing conflict of interest, has been satisfied).
24. See Model Rules of Professional Conduct, rule 1.13(d) (1983).
25. Corporations may be liable for an employee's criminal misconduct
where the employee acted within the scope of employment. See U.S. v. George
F. Fish, Inc., et al., 154 F.2d 798 (2d Cir.), cert. denied, 328 U.S. 869
(1946); Standard Oil Co. v. U.S., 307 F.2d 120 (5th Cir. 1962).
26. Whether an employee asserts a privilege before a regulator or grand
jury is a separate issue. For the company to evaluate its position
meaningfully, it must have access to the employee and his or her
information. How the employee defends personally is an issue for the
employee. When an employee talks with the company but not with the
government, the pressure on the company to waive the company's
attorney-client privilege can be expected to increase.
27. Cooper, n. 1 supra, at 7.
28. Gutfreund, n. 1 supra, at 83,606 (``the responsibility of
broker-dealers to supervise their employees is a critical component of the
federal regulatory scheme''); see also In the Matter of Smith Barney,
Harris Upham & Co., Exch. Act. Rel. No. 21813 (Mar. 5, 1985) (broker-dealer
sanctioned for failure to supervise salesmen or enforce compliance
procedures).
29. Gutfreund, n. 1 supra, at 83,606 - 83,607. See also Securities and
Exchange Commission v. Salomon Inc. and Salomon Brothers Inc., Lit. Rel.
No. 13246, 51 SEC Docket 817 (SDNY 1992) (setting forth the Commission's
findings that Solomon's management, aware of Mozer's previous misconduct,
failed to supervise him in a manner designed to prevent violations of the
securities laws). The final settlement required Salomon to pay $122 million
in civil penalties, $68 million in payment of potential Department of
Justice claims, and $100 million into a fund for civil claims against the
company.


Information has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable.
However, accuracy, adequacy, or completeness is not guaranteed.
Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
S&P'S REV. OF SEC. & COMMODITIES REGS. via NewsNet
January 24, 1996   Vol. 29, N

ASSET CONCENTRATION ISSUES IN REAL ESTATE SECURITIZATIONS

By:
Karsten P. Giesecke and Michael Ready Treanor, Jr.*

The volume of new issuances of commercial (including multifamily)
mortgage-backed securities (``CMBSs'') has grown at a tremendous pace since
1991, and significantly more CMBSs are likely to be issued in the future.
For example, only two percent of non-multifamily commercial mortgage loans
have been securitized.1 Much of this increased CMBS volume has been in the
form of registered public offerings, even though public offerings of CMBSs
implicate co-registration and disclosure issues not present in traditional
mortgage or asset-backed transactions. Disclosure issues arise in a CMBS
transaction largely due to the economic significance of individual mortgage
loans that back a CMBS. In particular, where individual mortgage loans or a
group of related mortgage loans constitute a significant portion of the
assets underlying a CMBS offering, borrowers or other parties may be
required to sign the registration statement as ``co-issuers,'' or the user
may be required to provide financial disclosure regarding the borrowers or
the properties backing such a CMBS. This article will discuss the current
rules governing co-issuer registration and financial disclosure applicable
to registered CMBS offerings.
COMMERCIAL OR MULTIFAMILY MORTGAGE-BACKED SECURITIES
Mortgage-backed securities are securities backed by one or more mortgage
loans in a structure designed to protect investors from credit risks (other
than those associated with the underlying mortgage loans), particularly
against claims by creditors of the issuer or sponsor of the transaction.
Such securities can therefore be rated based on anticipated cash flows
from, and credit risks associated with, such mortgage loans.
   Registration of public mortgage-backed securities may be accomplished
under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the ``1933 Act''), by filing
a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the
``Commission''), usually using either form S-11 or form S-3. Form S-11 may
be used for the registration of securities of certain real estate companies
and is available for the issuance of either (i) securities issued by real
estate investment trusts, or (ii) securities issued by issuers whose
primary business is that of acquiring, and holding for investment, real
estate or interests in real estate or interests in other issuers whose
business is investing in real estate.2 Since amendments made to form S-3 as
announced in the Commission's Rel. No. 33-6964 (1992) (the ``Asset-Backed
Shelf Release''), form S-3 is available to, among others, issuers of
``asset-backed securities'' that are offered for cash and which are
``investment grade.''3 Unlike form S-11, form S-3 permits the issuer to
incorporate by reference reports filed under the Securities Exchange Act of
1934, as amended (the ``1934 Act''). Only issuers using form S-3 have the
additional benefit of the no-action position of the staff of the
Commission's Division of Corporation Finance (the ``Staff''), which permits
delivery of certain computational materials and collateral information
before delivery of a final prospectus.4 Registrants using both form S-3
and form S-11 may also be able to offer securities on a delayed basis
pursuant to the Commission's 1933 Act rule 415.5
   Mortgage loans backing traditional single-family residential
mortgage-backed securities generally contain large numbers of homogeneous
mortgage loans, thereby rendering each individual mortgage loan
statistically insignificant and allowing rating agencies to rate a
transaction based on a statistical analysis of the pool as a whole. The
Commission similarly has concluded that, for traditional single-family
residential mortgage-backed securities, financial information concerning
the related borrowers is unimportant to the investment decision.6 In
contrast, because the initial principal balance of a typical commercial or
multifamily mortgage loan is much higher than the principal balance of the
individual obligations backing other securitizations of pooled assets, CMBS
pools often include fewer mortgage loans, with each individual asset
representing a larger percentage of the pool (an ``asset
concentration'').7
   The Commission has identified two principal consequences of asset
concentration. First, the Commission has indicated that ``asset-backed
offerings with significant asset concentration may involve one or more
co-issuers under Securities Act Rule 140.'' In addition, the Commission has
indicated that ``if a significant amount of the asset pool represents the
obligations of a single obligor or related obligors, financial information
and other disclosure about the obligor(s) may be required.''
   In the Asset-Backed Shelf Release the staff declined expressly to
identify asset concentration limits, indicating instead that existing
disclosure rules would continue to apply. The Staff has since settled on
three key concentration levels as being important. A mortgage loan
representing 45 percent of a pool triggers co-issuer requirements, a
mortgage loan representing over 20 percent of a pool triggers requirements
to file full audited property-level financial statements, and a mortgage
loan representing over 10 percent of a pool triggers requirements for
condensed unaudited property-level financial statements.
CO-REGISTRATION AND RULE 140
The Asset-Backed Shelf Release stated that securities backed by the assets
of a single obligor or group of related obligors are not ``asset-backed
securities'' for purposes of the new form S-3 rules.8 As a result, an
issuer relying on characterization of its securities as ``asset-backed
securities'' to make such securities eligible for form S-3 and shelf
registration under rule 4159 must involve at least two obligors or groups
of related obligors.10
Of greater significance than the prohibition against shelf registration for
single obligor pools is the requirement that, where significant asset
concentration exists, one or more borrowers with respect to the underlying
mortgage loans may be required to co-register the issuance of the
securities.11 Rule 140 of the 1933 Act provides that:
[a] person, the chief part of whose business consists of the purchase of
the securities of one issuer, or of two or more affiliated issuers, and the
sale of its own securities ... is to be regarded as engaged in the
distribution of the securities of such issuer or affiliated issuers within
the meaning of Section 2(11) of the [1933 Act]. [emphasis added]
   In simpler terms, rule 140 provides that when an issuer of a security
(the ``Delivered Security'') uses the proceeds of the sale of the Delivered
Security to acquire securities of another issuer (the ``Underlying
Security'') from such issuer, the issuer of the Delivered Security is also
deemed to be engaged in a distribution of the Underlying Security.
Accordingly, the Underlying Security is also being publicly offered and the
``issuer'' of the Delivered Security, who is deemed to be directly
accessing the capital markets, must sign the related registration statement
as a registrant in the public offering of the Delivered Security. The view
of the Staff that rule 140 is applicable in the context of a commercial
mortgage loan-backed securitization suggests that the Staff views mortgage
loans (including those providing for recourse only against the mortgaged
property) as securities requiring registration if sold in a public
offering.12
   In order to determine the applicability of rule 140 to a particular
securitization, it is necessary to determine whether the ``chief part'' of
the business of the issuer of the Delivered Security is the purchase of
Underlying Securities of a single obligor or related obligors. The Staff
has taken the position that where obligations backing securities include
the obligations of a single obligor or related obligors constituting at
least 45 percent of the mortgage loan pool backing such securities, rule
140 is implicated and such obligor or related obligors must co-register.
   Rule 140 has generally been viewed as applying only where a person
purchases securities from an issuer, and therefore, would not apply where
mortgage loans made to a non-affiliate are acquired in the secondary market
and not from the borrower. In addition, there have been indications from
the Staff that it is reconsidering the inapplicability of rule 140 to such
secondary market purchases and may expand its breadth.13 In the context of
commercial mortgage securitization, the Staff has taken a broader position,
to the effect that rule 140 applies if the issuer of the Underlying
Security financially benefits from the securitization (as a result of which
the issuer of the Delivered Security may have leverage to require the
involvement of the issuer of the Underlying Security in the offering of the
Delivered Security). In such cases, it is appropriate to determine whether
``significant involvement'' exists based on the individual facts and
circumstances presented.
   Where co-registration is required, securities which might have been
eligible for issuance under rule 415 of the 1933 Act on a delayed or
continuous basis (i.e., a shelf registration) will now, as a practical
matter, be required to be registered on a separate registration statement
(i.e., on a one-off basis) because of the need to include the related
obligor as a co-registrant.14 This has the effect of increasing the costs
associated with a CMBS transaction by requiring the preparation of a full
registration statement for each new issue. In addition to the time and
expense of issuing securities on a one-off basis, forcing an obligor to
co-register means that the obligor will be liable as an issuer under the
1933 Act and the 1934 Act and may become subject to the reporting
requirements of the 1934 Act.15
   In addition, the co-registration concentration levels trigger issuer
financial statement disclosure requirements with respect to the obligor of
the Underlying Security. Under regulation S-X, sections 3-01 and 3-02, the
borrower's financial statements must be included in the disclosure to
potential securityholders. Regulation S-X, section 3-01 requires each
registrant to file a consolidated audited balance sheet as of the end of
each of the two most recent fiscal years or, if the registrant has been in
existence for less than one fiscal year, as of a date within 135 days of
the date of filing the registration statement.16 Furthermore, section 3-02
requires the registrant to file a consolidated audited statement ``of
income and cash flows for each of the three fiscal years preceding the date
of the most recent audited balance sheet being filed or such shorter period
as the registrant (including predecessors) has been in existence.''17 For
filings made more than 134 days after the end of the fiscal year, an
unaudited interim balance sheet and a corresponding statement of income and
cash flows must be provided.18
   In a typical CMBS securitization, the mortgagor is often a newly-created
special purpose entity which has as its sole asset the ownership of the
underlying real property, and, accordingly, it might be expected that the
mortgagor's financial statements only cover a short period of time. The
requirement of section 3-02 that the registrant's statement of income and
cash flows include predecessor businesses may, however, create significant
difficulty if mortgage loan borrower financial statements are required.
Since the special purpose vehicle may be considered a successor to the
earlier business from which it acquired the property, financial statements
of such predecessor business may be required. Such predecessor financial
statements may not be readily obtainable. Section 3-05 of regulation S-X
addresses predecessor business financial disclosure and indicates that a
determination of whether a business has been acquired is to be made with
reference to the guidance set forth in regulations S-X, section 11-01(d).
Under section 11-01(d), an acquisition of a business occurs when, in light
of the facts and circumstances involved, ``there is sufficient continuity
of the acquired entity's operations prior to and after the transactions so
that disclosure of prior financial information is material to an
understanding of future operations.''19 Such continuity is more likely to
be viewed as present if the special purpose vehicle is related to the prior
obligor. To resolve predecessor business issues, it is likely that a
discussion with the Chief Accountant's Office of the Commission would be
appropriate.
PROPERTY-LEVEL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
As previously indicated, in instances where sufficient asset concentration
exists, the Commission requires disclosure of financial information
concerning the specific assets constituting the pool.
   The Staff has taken the position that, in the event that a single
mortgage loan exceeds 20 percent of the pool, audited financial statements
with respect to the property, as described in sections 3-01 and 3-02 of
regulation S-X, are required. As described above, sections 3-01 and 3-02
generally require audited balance sheets for the two most recent fiscal
years and audited income statements and statements of cash flows for the
three fiscal years preceding the date of the most recent audited balance
sheet being filed. In addition, for filings made after 134 days subsequent
to the most recent fiscal year, a balance sheet as of an interim date
within 135 days of the date of filing together with a related interim
statement of income and cash flows, which in each case may be unaudited,
must be provided. Staff Accounting Bulletins 71 and 71A (``SAB 71/71A'')
state that where ``the amount of a loan exceeds 20 percent of the amount in
good faith expected to be raised in the offering, disclosure would be
expected to consist of financial statements for the underlying operating
properties for the periods contemplated by rule 3-14,''20 which indicates
that, for acquired properties, financial statements are for shorter
periods. Rule 3-14 does not apply in the case of acquired businesses,
however, as to which rule 3-01 and 3-02 financials (including as required
for predecessor businesses) must be included. In many cases (including in
particular where the acquired assets are in the form of a business, such as
hotel or nursing home loans), the Staff has viewed acquired mortgage loans
as acquired businesses.
   The Staff has taken the position that ``condensed'' financial
information should be provided as to assets that constitute more than 10
percent but not more than 20 percent of the entire pool.21 Condensed
financial information is financial information generally presented in
accordance with article X of regulation S-X and generally consists of
consolidated unaudited statements similar to those required in a form 10-Q
filing under the 1934 Act.
ADDITIONAL ASSET CONCENTRATION ISSUES
While the Staff's position with respect to asset concentration provides
guidance to CMBS issuers, it leaves unresolved many issues regarding
exactly what constitutes asset concentration. In particular, in what
instances do the relationships between borrowers, cross-collateralization,
common tenants, or other common features between mortgage loans result in
such mortgage loans being treated as a single mortgage loan for the
foregoing analysis, or result in the underlying borrowers being treated as
a single borrower? The analysis is a factual one resolved on a case-by-case
basis, generally after prior consultation with the Staff. Nevertheless,
certain guidelines are available.
   In the instance of a pool consisting of fully cross-collateralized and
cross-defaulted mortgage loans securing the debt of unrelated obligors, the
Staff has indicated that such a pool would be treated as a single loan
subject to the 10 percent or 20 percent financial reporting standards, as
appropriate, even though the individual obligors may be completely
unrelated.22 In addition, the underlying borrowers are generally regarded
by the Staff as a single borrower under the assumption that they are acting
in concert. This may not be the case where it can be proven that the
unrelated obligors have voluntarily cross-collateralized and
cross-defaulted without the expectation of a pecuniary or other benefit,
which would seem to be an exceedingly rare situation.
   In addition to obligor-based asset concentration, other types of
concentration may trigger the need for additional financial disclosure. In
the event that there is a concentration of tenants, financial statements
for such tenants may be required,23 although it is unclear at what level of
concentration such financial statements will be required, and, if required,
the nature of such financial statements (i.e., audited or condensed).24
Furthermore, in the event of a concentration of managers, the Staff has
indicated that it may require financial statements for such managers
because of a perception that the bankruptcy of a significant manager could
affect securityholders.25


About the Author(s):

*KARSTEN P. GIESECKE is a partner, and MICHAEL READY TREANOR is an
associate, at Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft in New York City. The authors
also recognize the contributions of ANNA GLICK, SUSAN CHALFIN, and RICHARD
KNAUB, also with Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft.

Reference(s):

1. Watterson, Commercial Mortgage Securitizations, Rev. of Sec. and Comm.
Reg. (Sept. 14, 1994.)
2. See General Instructions to form S-11.
3. ``Asset-backed securities'' include qualifying mortgage-backed
securities (including commercial mortgage-backed securities). ``Investment
grade'' means that at the time of the sale to the public, the securities
are rated by at least one nationally recognized statistical rating
organization in one of its generic rating categories signifying investment
grade (typically one of the four highest categories). Form S-3 is also
generically available to large, widely-held issuers, to subsidiaries of
such companies, and for securities guaranteed by such companies. See
General Instructions to form S-3.
4. Because mortgage-backed securities are frequently not structured (and
therefore a final prospectus cannot be printed) until after certain
institutional investors have decided on their particular requirements after
receipt of certain information, the Staff has permitted delivery by
registrants of asset-backed securities on form S-3 of certain computational
materials and collateral information prior to the delivery of a final
prospectus. See Kidder, Peabody Acceptance Corporation I (avail. May 20,
1994); Public Securities Association (avail. May 27, 1994).
5. Rule 415 or, as it is commonly referred to, the ``shelf rule'', permits
certain securities to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis, thereby
avoiding the necessity of preparing a new registration statement for each
offering, and thus greatly speeding up the time required to issue new
securities and reducing related costs. Rule 415 is available to offerings
which ``qualify'' for form S-3 and, therefore, in the event an offering
``qualifies'' for form S-3, the offering may be registered under another
form (such as form S-1 or form S-11) and still offer securities ``off the
shelf''. Rule 415 is also available for ``mortgage-related securities,''
which include certain securities rated in one of the two highest rating
categories by a nationally recognized statistical rating agency and which
are backed by qualifying residential mortgage loans.
6. The Commission indicated in the Asset-Backed Shelf Release that in a
situation where asset-backed securities are secured ``by a pool of
financial assets representing obligations of a large number of obligors ...
the information about the financial condition of any one obligor is not
important to an investment decision.''
7. Larger pools of commercial or multifamily mortgage loans may avoid
asset concentration issues. This is particularly true for ``conduit''
programs providing for acquisition of mortgage loans from multiple sources
which, as part of the program parameters, limit the size of mortgage loans
specifically to avoid asset concentration concerns.
8. Id. at page 22 ``... the definition does not encompass securities
issued in structured financings for one obligor or related group of
obligors''. See also Rel. No. 33-6943 (notice of proposed rulemaking) at 25
(``Structured financings would not be considered asset-backed securities
for the purposes of the proposed revisions to form S-3 where a substantial
portion of the underlying assets are originated by one obligor (including
affiliated entities).'')
9. Single-loan multifamily mortgage-backed securities may still be
eligible for shelf registration if they constitute ``mortgage-related
securities'' as used in rule 415.
10. As described below, unless the underlying mortgage loans were acquired
in secondary market purchases so that rule 140 would not apply, or
co-registrants are already included in the shelf registration statement, as
a practical matter at least three obligors or groups of obligors would be
required.
11. In the Asset-Backed Shelf Release, the Staff stated that, in instances
where there is significant asset concentration, such an asset-backed
offering ``may involve one or more co-issuers under rule 140.''
12. But see Bob Reves, et al. v. Ernst & Young, 494 U.S. 56 (1990).
13. Although open-market purchases of commercial mortgage loans may not
trigger rule 140 (assuming no involvement at all by the obligors under such
loans in the new offering and regardless of the existence of asset
concentration with respect to the mortgage loans), they could potentially
trigger the requirement for property-level financial statements in the
event that mortgage loans of a single obligor or group of related obligors
exceed the 10% or 20% thresholds described below.
14. The Staff has taken the position that the amendment of a shelf
registration statement so as to add or change a co-registrant is not
permissible.
15. But see Linpro Income Fund I Partnership (avail. Nov. 29, 1986) and
Rockefeller Center Properties & RCP Associates (avail Jan. 2, 1986)
(co-registrant not required to file 1934 Act reports). Furthermore, this
article does not attempt to address the potential applicability of the
Trust Indenture Act of 1939 to the mortgage notes insofar as they are
considered debt securities by the Commission.
16. Reg. 210.3-01(a).
17. Reg. 210.3-03(a).
18. Regs. 210.3-01(e), 210.3-02(b).
19. Reg. 210.11-01(d). Additional factors are also included such as
whether the nature of the revenue-producing activity will remain
essentially the same as before the transaction and whether certain
enumerated attributes such as physical facilities, sales force, and trade
names (to name a few) will remain in place after the transaction.
20. SAB 71, interpretive response to Question 1.
21. Comments of Linda Quinn, Director of the Division of Corporate
Finance, at the ABA Annual Meeting on August 9-10, 1994. The requirement to
provide condensed financial information is not based on any published
position of the Commission. Indeed there is some authority indicating that
audited financial statements would be required, at least with respect to
investment-type arrangements. In the Staff Accounting Bulletins, Topic 1 --
Financial Statements, I. Financial Statements of Properties Securing
Mortgage Loans, the Staff indicated that ``separate audited financial
statements should be provided for any investment-type arrangement that
constitutes 10% or more of the greater of (i) the amount of minimum
proceeds, or (ii) the total assets of the registrant, including the amount
of proceeds raised'' and this language has been cited by the Staff in
support of its asset concentration thresholds. Of course, the Commission
bases its standards only in part on the Staff Accounting Bulletins, as the
interpretive responses in Topic 1 were not specifically drafted for CMBS
transactions.
22. Such an analysis would create the result that audited property level
financial statements should be included on an aggregate basis. Such
financial statements, however, are not always available and the exact
nature of financial disclosure must generally be resolved in discussions
with the Staff.
23. Unlike the requirement for obligor financials which, in a non-recourse
transaction, is of nominal investor interest, financial information
concerning major tenants appears to be of significant investor interest as
the availability of funds to pay securityholders will depend on the
timeliness of the lease payments by major tenants.
24. The Staff has indicated that, in cases where there is tenant
concentration but the tenant is not involved in the offering (and,
accordingly, audited financial statements, and related auditors' consents,
cannot be obtained), the transaction may still proceed as a registered
public offering provided that the tenant is a publicly reporting company
and its public filings (including audited financial statements) can be
referenced in the prospectus.
25. This view is mitigated by provisions in the relevant documents which
provide for replacement of the manager and the use of a lockbox or other
mechanism to protect the cash flow from creditors of the manager.


Information has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable.
However, accuracy, adequacy, or completeness is not guaranteed.
Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill Companies



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>