
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B36-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B010-292</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/ev05.html 205.156.212.5 19970115001407 text/html 50479
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 00:11:44 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:47:23 GMT
Content-length: 50290
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/ev05.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet <BR>
January 12, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURES</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>USCG STRIKES A COMPROMISE IN FINAL OSRO GUIDELINES</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2378 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>NOAA ADOPTS RESTORATION-BASED NRDA PROCESS IN FINAL RULE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2887 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>BRIEFS</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><A HREF = "#3"><LI>UNDERWATER PIPELINE RUPTURE CAUSES MAJOR SPILL IN RUSSIA'S&nbsp;SOUTHERN URAL MOUNTAINS.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(318 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#4"><A HREF = "#4"><LI>SOLAS AMENDMENTS MANDATE ENHANCED INSPECTION PROGRAM FOR AGING&nbsp;TANKERS AND BULKERS.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(345 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#5"><A HREF = "#5"><LI>ENVIRONMENT CANADA REPORT EXAMINES BEHAVIOR OF OIL IN COARSE&nbsp;SEDIMENTS.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(334 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>WORLD SPILL BRIEFS.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(539 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN HOTLINE.</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(603 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

USCG STRIKES A COMPROMISE IN FINAL OSRO GUIDELINES

In a compromise between the conflicting concerns of the nation's
two largest oil spill removal organizations (OSROs), the
U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) has issued final guidelines on a revamped
OSRO classification process that will require response
organizations to maintain "redundant" quantities of any
contracted or "nondedicated" response resources that they wish to
count toward their classifications. In the weeks preceding the
release of the final guidelines, the National Response Corp.
(NRC) and the Marine Spill Response Corp. (MSRC) expressed very
different views regarding the way that the revamped
classification system should count nondedicated resources (OPB,
15 Dec. 1995, p.1). MSRC, whose response network consists
primarily of owned or "dedicated" response resources, argued that
nondedicated resources should not be counted toward an OSRO's
classification unless the OSRO can demonstrate the ability to
deploy those resources in a timely manner. In contrast, NRC,
which makes extensive use of nondedicated equipment and
personnel, contended that, for classification purposes, dedicated
and nondedicated resources should be considered equivalent.

Under the final guidelines, an OSRO may count nondedicated
resources as part of its response capability, but it must arrange
for access to at least twice as much nondedicated equipment and
personnel as it needs to meet the guidelines' response resource
standards. "If an OSRO elects to use nondedicated resources,
there must be a redundancy factor of 2 to 1," USCG wrote in the
final guidelines. "This means that the OSRO must ensure the
availability of nondedicated response resources by contract or
other approved means in quantities equal to twice what the OSRO"
would be required to maintain if those same resources were
dedicated, according to USCG. "Ideally, dedicated resources
provide more of a timely response 'guarantee' than nondedicated
resources," Admiral James Card explained in a cover letter
accompanying the final guidelines. However, "historically, the
response industry has depended to varying degrees on nondedicated
resources to perform some critical response functions," according
to Admiral Card. "To better ensure the availability of these
nondedicated resources, we have required a redundancy factor of
2 to 1 when using nondedicated response resources," Admiral Card
wrote.

USCG's decision to require a 2 to 1 redundancy factor for
nondedicated resources appears to be acceptable to NRC, but not
to MSRC. "Everyone was waiting to see how USCG would handle the
issue of dedicated and nondedicated resources," NRC President
Mark Miller told OPB. "I think they have reached a compromise
that addresses the concerns of all of the parties involved,"
Miller said. "With the tremendous inventory of dedicated and
nondedicated resources that NRC has available, I fully expect
that the program we developed several years ago will stand up
under the new classification system," Miller said. MSRC Corporate
Relations Director Greg Rixon told OPB that, although "redundant
contracts may increase the likelihood that nondedicated resources
will be available in the event of a spill, MSRC still believes
that the only way to positively ensure response capability is to
maintain dedicated resources." In addition, MSRC contends that a
redundancy factor of 2 to 1 does not provide sufficient assurance
of equipment availability, according to Rixon. "In our opinion,
USCG would be close to achieving a reasonable assurance of
availability with a redundancy factor of 3 to 1, and would
probably reach full assurance with a factor of 4 to 1," Rixon
said.

OSRO classification background: USCG classifies OSROs to help
vessel and facility owners select organizations that are capable
of meeting their response planning requirements under the Oil
Pollution Act of 1990 (OPA 90). Section 4202 of OPA 90 requires
vessel and facility owners to develop response plans that
"identify and ensure, by contract or other means, the
availability of private personnel and equipment necessary to
remove, to the maximum extent practicable, a worst-case
discharge." The OSRO classification process is voluntary;
response organizations are not required to apply for OSRO
classification. Although vessel and facility owners do not have
to contract with classified OSROs to meet the OPA 90 planning
requirements, plan holders who rely on classified OSROs are
exempted from the requirement to document in their plans all of
the response resources that they intend to contract in the event
of a spill.

The newly released final OSRO classification guidelines replace
those contained in Navigation and Vessel Inspection Circular
(NVIC) No. 12-92, which USCG issued in December 1992 (OPB,
18 Dec. 1992., p.2). "After the implementation of NVIC No. 12-92,
weaknesses were identified in the classification process that
prevented the program from realistically representing the
response capabilities of an OSRO," Admiral Card explained in the
cover letter for the final guidelines. USCG held public workshops
in January 1994 and June 1995 to solicit comments on the OSRO
classification process and, during September 1995, issued draft
guidelines on a revamped system (OPB, 22 Sept. 1995, p.1).
According to Admiral Card, USCG received written comments on the
draft guidelines from about 70 organizations during the public
comment period, which ended on 30 November 1995. "As a result of
the comments received, and our own review, the draft guidelines
have undergone many changes," Card noted. He claimed that the
final guidelines will allow USCG to "accurately and consistently
calculate an OSRO's capability to respond to specific plan holder
requirements."

"We continue to stress that using a USCG-classified OSRO does not
in any way relieve plan holders of the responsibility to ensure
that their specific response needs are met," Card wrote in his
cover letter. "The revised classification guidelines provide a
good indication of an OSRO's response capability by COTP zone,"
Card noted. The OSRO classifications "do not, however, represent
a 'one size fits all' solution," Card wrote. "USCG created the
voluntary OSRO classification program so that facility and vessel
response plan holders could list USCG-evaluated OSROs in lieu of
providing voluminous detailed lists of response resources,"
according to Admiral Card. "This was, and still is, the only
regulatory benefit that plan holders receive from utilizing USCG-
classified OSROs," Admiral Card explained.

Final OSRO classification process: Although USCG has included new
requirements for nondedicated resources and other changes in the
final guidelines, the final classification process is very
similar to that outlined in the draft guidelines proposed during
September 1995. Like the draft guidelines, the final guidelines
specify that USCG will enter information about each OSRO's
response resources into a database--the Response Resource
Inventory--and then use a computer program to classify the
organization. The program will assign each response organization
"geographic-specific" classifications--that is, separate
classifications for each Captain of the Port (COTP) zone in which
the organization operates. According to USCG, the computer
program will automatically take into account an OSRO's ability to
transport or "cascade" its resources in response to spills
outside of the COTP zones in which the equipment is stored.

For each COTP zone, USCG will assign a response organization one
of five OSRO classifications ranging from A (least capacity) to
E (most capacity) in any or all of the following operating
environments: rivers and canals, inland regions, the Great Lakes,
and oceans. The five classifications will reflect both an
organization's ability to deploy equipment within certain time
frames and its effective daily recovery capacity (EDRC)--a
function of the amount of boom, oil recovery equipment, and
temporary storage that the OSRO can access during a spill
response. For example, to receive a class C rating in the inland
operating environment of a particular COTP zone, an OSRO would
have to have an EDRC of 10,000 barrels per day. In addition, that
OSRO would have to be capable of mounting a spill response in
that COTP zone within the following time frames: 6 hours for a
spill from a facility in a high-volume port; 12 hours for a
facility spill in a non-high-volume port; 12 hours for a spill
from a vessel in a high-volume port; and 24 hours for a vessel
spill in a non-high-volume port.

Like the draft OSRO classification process, the final OSRO
classification process takes into account not only an
organization's total response resources, but also its ability to
deploy various types of response equipment together as a
"system." According to both the draft and the final guidelines,
an organization's EDRC will be determined by the least-capable
component of its oil recovery system. For example, if an OSRO has
a temporary storage capacity of 30,000 barrels per day, but has
skimming or vacuum equipment that is capable of recovering only
10,000 barrels per day, the OSRO's EDRC will be limited to
10,000 barrels per day. During the classification process, USCG
may consider any of the following additional factors: the
availability of trained personnel to operate the organization's
equipment; the suitability of the OSRO's equipment for the
environments in which it operates; the organization's ability to
provide logistical support for a spill response; and the OSRO's
ability to use response techniques other than mechanical recovery
methods.

Changes from the draft process: Based on the comments received on
the draft guidelines, USCG made several revisions to the final
OSRO classification process. The final guidelines give each OSRO
the option to apply for classifications in a particular COTP zone
based on its resources in a city in the zone other than the city
in which the COTP office is located. In contrast, the draft
guidelines would have counted only the resources in the COTP
city. In the draft guidelines, USCG specifically stated that the
temporary storage capacity used to calculate an OSRO's EDRC would
"not include fixed, shore-based storage capacity." However, in
the final guidelines, USCG revised this policy. "An OSRO that
operates in an area where fixed storage is a realistic asset may
claim fixed storage as meeting part of its temporary storage
requirement," according to USCG. When determining whether to
count fixed storage, "the key factor that USCG will evaluate is
whether the temporary storage that an OSRO has identified will
allow the OSRO to sustain its classified EDRC throughout spill
response operations," the agency noted.

Under the draft guidelines, USCG would have evaluated an OSRO's
ability to dispose of recovered oil as part of the classification
process, but this criterion has been omitted from the final
guidelines. In addition, in the draft guidelines, USCG did not
address whether OSROs could receive credit for response resources
designated to meet state resident-equipment requirements.
However, in the final guidelines, USCG noted that "OSROs that
have designated equipment to meet state resident-equipment
requirements must indicate this on their OSRO application."
According to USCG, "for classification purposes, designated
resident equipment is not cascadable outside of the area for
which it is designated." As under the draft guidelines, OSROs
classified under the final guidelines will be reevaluated every
three years to verify that their classifications are accurate.
The final guidelines also specify that USCG will conduct "random
spot checks" between each regularly scheduled reinspection visit
"to confirm resource availability and equipment operability."

Reaction from NRC and MSRC: In separate interviews with OPB about
the final OSRO classification process, NRC and MSRC both
commented on the importance of dedicated resources to the
nation's overall spill response capability. To illustrate MSRC's
perspective, Rixon compared USCG's response planning regulations
to a high-jump competition. "Congress and USCG initially set the
bar at a certain height," according to Rixon. "USCG then
discovered that only one company--MSRC--could clear the bar,"
Rixon claimed. "Rather than say to everyone else, you must train
harder to compete in this event, USCG decided to lower the bar,"
according to Rixon. "We are not the only organization with
dedicated resources, but we did acquire a higher percentage of
dedicated resources than any other organization, and we did that
at great cost to our clients," Rixon explained. "When NRC and
other companies wanted to get into the game, they decided not to
spend the kind of money that we spent," according to Rixon. "In
fact, these companies realized that they could gain a competitive
edge by not acquiring as many dedicated resources," Rixon said.

By failing to fully recognize the limitations of nondedicated
resources in the OSRO classification system, USCG "has placed the
whole concept of dedicated resources in grave jeopardy," Rixon
claimed. "The end of dedicated resources will not come like a
thunderclap," according to Rixon. "Tomorrow, we will not wake up
and find that all of this country's dedicated response resources
are gone, but they will erode slowly, and eventually no OSROs
will have them," Rixon said. "Then, at some time in the future,
USCG will try to execute the response plans that are in place,
and they will discover that the dedicated assets that they were
relying on are not there any more," Rixon said. "We believe that
USCG must take steps to ensure that dedicated assets remain in
place or that nondedicated resources are maintained in sufficient
numbers so that there is some degree of certainty that enough
equipment and personnel will be available when a major spill
occurs," Rixon said. In addition, "USCG must improve its efforts
to test and evaluate the capability of OSROs on a true no-notice
basis, especially those OSROs that rely on nondedicated
resources," according to Rixon.

According to NRC's Miller, "there is no proof that dedicated
equipment is more reliable than nondedicated equipment during a
spill response." Miller pointed out that "NRC has responded
successfully to 85 oil spills," whereas "MSRC does not have that
kind of track record." Therefore, MSRC "can only guess that their
dedicated resources might be better in a spill response," Miller
said. He noted that, "at a time when most of MSRC's customers are
doing away with their owned and dedicated tanker fleets and
regularly chartering ships on the spot market, it seems curious
to me that MSRC does not recognize the hypocrisy of advocating
dedicated resources for spill response." According to Miller,
"MSRC went out and spent a lot of money on dedicated equipment,
and as a result, they have saddled their customers with a
tremendous expense and an ungainly organization." In contrast,
"NRC looked at the marketplace, purchased equipment as needed,
saw that nondedicated resources were available, and developed a
better program for our customers," Miller said. For a copy of the
final OSRO classification guidelines, at no cost, contact: Terry
Hoover, Commandant (G-MEP-2), USCG Headquarters, 2100 Second
Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20593-0001; Tel: 202-267-0448;
Fax: 202-267-4085.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

NOAA ADOPTS RESTORATION-BASED NRDA PROCESS IN FINAL RULE

On 5 January, the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) issued its long-awaited final rule
specifying the methods that federal, state, and tribal trustees
are authorized to use when conducting natural resource damage
assessments (NRDAs) under OPA 90. The NRDA process described in
the final rule is essentially the same as the "restoration-based"
approach outlined in NOAA's "reproposed" NRDA rule, which the
agency issued during August 1995 (OPB, 11 Aug. 1995, p.1). Under
the final rule, which will take effect on 5 February, the NRDA
process will focus on determining the appropriate scale of the
restoration projects required to "make the environment and the
public whole" following a spill. The trustees for the natural
resources injured by an oil spill will evaluate the injuries
caused by the spill and develop a detailed plan for returning the
injured resources to their baseline condition and compensating
the public for the lost use of those resources while they are
being restored. The responsible parties (RPs) will then either
fund or implement the restoration plan.

The restoration-based NRDA approach contained in the final rule
and in NOAA's August 1995 proposal differs significantly from the
process that the agency outlined in its first proposed NRDA rule
during January 1994 (OPB, 15 Jan. 1994, p.1). Under that original
proposed rule, the NRDA process would have focused on assessing
the monetary value of the natural resources injured by an oil
spill. The RPs would then have been required to pay the
calculated sum to the trustees, who would have used it to restore
or replace the injured natural resources. The January 1994
proposal was sharply criticized by representatives of the marine
insurance and oil transportation industries, who argued that the
methods it proposed for calculating natural resource values were
arbitrary and therefore might lead to grossly inflated damage
claims under OPA 90. The critics of the January 1994 proposed
rule were particularly concerned about its inclusion of the
controversial contingent-valuation method, which involves the use
of surveys to determine the "passive use" values of natural
resources. Passive use values are the values that people attach
to resources that they do not use but that they nevertheless
regard as important to preserve.

Like NOAA's August 1995 proposal, the final NRDA rule defines a
more limited role for contingent valuation and other valuation
methods than the role outlined in NOAA's January 1994 proposal.
The final rule limits the use of valuation techniques to specific
circumstances and states that these techniques may be used only
to determine the appropriate scale of natural resource
restoration projects. The use of contingent valuation and other
valuation methods for this purpose "avoids many problems
identified by commenters regarding the use of continent valuation
to calculate a dollar value" for natural resource damages, as
specified in the January 1994 proposed rule, NOAA stated in the
final rule. According to NOAA, under the final rule, RPs are
liable for the cost of implementing restoration actions that
generate value equivalent to the lost value of the injured
natural resources, not for reimbursing the trustees for the
calculated lost value of the resources.

NOAA's decision to limit the role of valuation methods in the
August 1995 proposed rule alarmed environmental groups, who
claimed that, by switching from the original valuation-based
approach to a restoration-based approach, the proposal would fail
to fully compensate the public for the inherent value of natural
resources. These groups argued that, by giving RPs the option to
undertake restoration projects instead of paying economic damages
following a spill, the proposal would ultimately lead to lower
recoveries for the public. Insurance companies and shipping
organizations also criticized the August 1995 proposed rule.
These groups claimed that, although the proposal focused the NRDA
process on determining the scale of restoration actions, it
provided only general guidance on NRDAs and would therefore give
trustees the option to use a wider variety of assessment methods.

In the preamble to the final rule, NOAA defended the restoration-
based NRDA approach. According to NOAA, by requiring trustees to
assess natural resource injuries for the purpose of determining
the required scale of restoration activities, the final NRDA
process will "validate trustee determinations regarding those
actions that will make the environment and public whole." In
addition, NOAA noted that, while the final rule "provides for the
use of a range of appropriate and cost-effective assessment
procedures," the rule also includes a set of standards that any
assessment procedure must meet. For example, the rule specifies
that assessment procedures must be "capable of providing
information of use in determining the type and scale of
restoration appropriate for a particular injury" and must be
"reliable and valid for the particular incident." NOAA also said
that, because the final rule gives RPs and the public
opportunities to participate in the restoration planning process,
"restoration will be achieved more quickly, transaction costs
will decrease, and litigation will be avoided."

NRDA rulemaking history: The publication of the final NRDA rule
came more than five years after NOAA first issued an advance
notice of proposed rulemaking in the Federal Register to solicit
comments on approaches for conducting NRDAs under OPA 90 (OPB,
18 Jan. 1991, p.1). Since that time, NOAA has published eleven
Federal Register notices related to the NRDA process, including
its first proposed NRDA rule during January 1994, the August 1995
reproposed rule, and the final NRDA rule. In addition, NOAA has
held numerous public workshops and regional meetings during the
past five years to solicit input on the various methods that have
been developed to assess natural resource damages. According to
NOAA, the final rule draws on the comments received and provides
"a NRDA process intended to meet OPA 90's goal of expeditious,
cost-effective, and feasible restoration of natural resources and
services injured by incidents involving oil."

Although the final rule was published in the Federal Register on
5 January, NOAA submitted the rule to the Federal Register office
on 28 December 1995, thereby meeting the deadline specified in a
consent decree that the agency reached last year with the Natural
Resources Defense Council (NRDC). The consent decree resolved a
suit filed during 1994 by NRDC and eight other environmental
groups against NOAA for failing to promulgate a final NRDA rule
by 18 August 1992, as required under OPA 90 (OPB, 4 Nov. 1994,
p.2). Under the consent decree, NOAA agreed to file its
reproposed NRDA rule with the Federal Register by 31 July 1995,
and to file the final rule on approaches for conducting NRDAs by
31 December 1995. The agency met both deadlines.

Final NRDA rule: Like the August 1995 proposed rule, the final
rule divides the NRDA process following an oil spill into three
phases: preassessment, restoration planning, and restoration
implementation. In the first phase--preassessment--the trustees
must determine whether the spill warrants a complete NRDA. Based
on the information available, the trustees must determine whether
the incident may have resulted in any injuries or any risk of
injuries to natural resources under their trusteeship and
therefore whether the incident qualifies for a natural resource
damage claim under OPA 90. In addition, the trustees must
evaluate whether the emergency spill response operations will
eliminate the threat of ongoing injuries to natural resources.
"If injuries are expected to continue, and feasible restoration
alternatives exist to address such injuries, the trustees may
proceed with the assessment," NOAA explained in the rule.

The second phase of the NRDA process--restoration planning--has
two components: injury assessment and restoration selection.
According to NOAA, "the goal of the injury assessment is to
determine the nature and extent of the injuries to natural
resources and services, thus providing a technical basis for
evaluating the need for, type of, and scale of restoration
actions." Under the final rule, natural resource injuries are
defined as any "observable or measurable change in a natural
resource" or any "impairment of a natural resource service." As
part of the injury assessment, the trustees must determine first
that natural resources have been exposed to the spilled oil, and
second that this exposure has caused an injury. By comparing the
condition of the injured resources to their baseline condition,
the trustees must quantify the degree and spatial extent of the
injuries and estimate their temporal extent.

After the injury assessment is completed, the trustees begin the
restoration selection process, which involves the identification,
evaluation, and selection of various restoration alternatives.
Under the final rule, the trustees must identify a "reasonable
range" of restoration alternatives, including both "primary
restoration actions," which are designed to help restore the
injured natural resources to their baseline condition, and
"compensatory restoration actions," which are intended to
compensate the public for the lost use of natural resources
during the restoration period. The final rule specifically states
that trustees must consider "natural recovery" as a primary
restoration option. In addition, the trustees may consider
actions intended to prevent interference with natural recovery or
more intensive actions that they believe would return injured
resources to their baseline condition more rapidly or with
greater certainty than natural recovery. When identifying
possible compensatory restoration actions, trustees are required
first to consider those actions that provide services of the same
type and quality as those lost as a result of the spill. If the
trustees cannot identify a reasonable range of this type of
compensatory actions, they may consider other compensatory
actions, provided that these actions make available services of
comparable type and quality to those lost.

To ensure that the restoration actions identified by the trustees
appropriately address the injuries arising from the incident, the
trustees must "scale" the actions. The final rule specifies two
approaches for determining the appropriate scale of a restoration
action: the "resource-to-resource" or "service-to-service"
approach, and the "valuation" approach. In the resource-to-
resource or service-to-service approach, the trustees determine
the quantity of resources or services that have been lost and
identify actions that provide at least an equal quantity of
replacement resources or services of the same type and quality as
those lost. In the valuation approach, the trustees use valuation
methods, such as contingent valuation, to calculate the value of
the resources or services lost as a result of the spill and to
determine the value expected to be gained from the various
restoration actions under consideration. The trustees then scale
the restoration actions so that they provide resources or
services of equal value to those lost. The final rule states that
trustees may use the valuation approach only if they are
considering actions that provide resources or services of a
different type and quality from those lost, or if the resource-
to-resource or service-to-service approach is inappropriate.

Once the trustees have identified a reasonable range of
restoration alternatives, they must select the "preferred"
alternatives. When selecting the preferred alternatives, the
trustees are required under the rule to consider the following
factors: 1) the cost of each alternative; 2) the extent to which
each alternative is expected to return the injured natural
resources and services to their baseline condition or to
compensate the public for the loss of resources and services
during the interim period; 3) the likelihood that each
alternative will be successful; 4) the extent to which each
alternative will prevent further natural resource injuries from
the spill and avoid collateral injuries during implementation;
5) the extent to which each alternative benefits more than one
natural resource or service; and 6) the effect of each
alternative on public health and safety. Under the final rule,
the trustees must select the most cost-effective of two or more
equally preferable alternatives. The trustees then develop a
draft restoration plan presenting the preferred alternatives and
make the draft plan available for public review and comment.
After reviewing the comments, the trustees develop a final
restoration plan.

In the third phase of the NRDA process--restoration
implementation--the trustees present the final plan to the RPs,
who must either implement the plan themselves or provide the
funding for the trustees to implement it. According to NOAA, the
restoration implementation phase provides an opportunity in the
NRDA process for the settlement of natural resource damage claims
without litigation, because the trustees and the RPs can
negotiate the best way to proceed with the restoration plan. If
the RPs refuse to fund or implement the final restoration plan,
the trustees are authorized under OPA 90 to file a civil suit
against the RPs in federal court to recover the cost of
implementing the plan. If the response costs and natural resource
damages arising from a spill exceed the RP's liability limit
under OPA 90, or if no RP has been identified, the trustees may
seek funding for the restoration from the Oil Spill Liability
Trust Fund.

Under OPA 90, NRDAs performed by federal, state, or tribal
trustees in accordance with the procedures contained in the final
rule "have the force and effect of a rebuttable presumption on
behalf of the trustees in any judicial or administrative
proceedings." In the final rule, NOAA interpreted this
presumption to mean that "the RP has the burden of presenting
alternative evidence on damages and of persuading the fact finder
that the damages presented by the trustees are not an appropriate
measure" of the natural resource injuries caused by a spill. If,
in any portion of an assessment, the trustees use procedures that
are determined not to be in accordance with the final rule, the
trustees will not receive the rebuttable presumption for that
portion of the assessment. In addition, NRDAs performed by
foreign trustees in accordance with the final rule are not
entitled to the rebuttable presumption.

NOAA's response to comments on earlier NRDA proposals: In the
final rule, NOAA noted that it "has made every effort to
consider" all of the comments that it received on the NRDA
proposals issued in January 1994 and August 1995, as well as the
comments submitted at the agency's public workshops and meetings
on NRDA issues. Of the 71 Federal Register pages in the final
rule, 37 pages are devoted to addressing comments. "Many
commenters supported the shift in focus from monetization of
damages to scaling of restoration actions" under the August 1995
proposal, NOAA said. "These commenters stated that the reproposed
rule properly placed the focus of the NRDA process on the
ultimate goal of OPA 90--to restore injured natural resources and
services," the agency said. However, according to NOAA, "many
other commenters raised concerns that the restoration approach
would lead to delays and increased assessment costs, since
trustees would have to undertake studies of both lost services
and replacement services." In addition, "several commenters
argued that the August 1995 proposal was significantly weaker
than the January 1994 proposal, with no justification except
industry pressure for an untested restoration-based approach
instead of the well-tested and supported economic valuation
procedures," according to NOAA. Other commenters characterized
the restoration-based NRDA approach as "an untried theory" that
"might be better or worse" than the valuation-based approach
originally proposed, NOAA said.

In defense of the restoration-based NRDA process, NOAA noted
that, under OPA 90, "all damages recovered must be spent on some
restoration activity." Therefore, the NRDA process should focus
on evaluating potential restoration actions, NOAA said. "It does
not benefit the natural resources or the public if monies are
collected without a view toward how they will be spent, nor
whether sufficient funds have been collected to implement any
meaningful restoration actions," according to NOAA. The agency
claimed that, "contrary to some comments, the restoration
approach will generally speed restoration and avoid litigation,
by alleviating distrust that claims for monetary damages are
speculative and punitive." According to NOAA, "practical
experience in implementing the restoration scaling approach in
past cooperative assessments suggests that this approach is
effective in significantly expediting the restoration of injured
natural resources and services." The agency added that "these
benefits to the environment and public do not come at the expense
of increased assessment costs." Although, under the final rule,
"trustees now must assess replacement services in addition to
lost services in most incidents," NOAA claimed that, "in general,
a net increase in assessment costs will not result, due to both
the cooperative provisions set forth within this rule and the
removal of the requirement that trustees estimate the monetary
value of damages."

According to NOAA, "the sole intent of the rule is to ensure the
restoration of natural resources and services that have been
injured, destroyed, or lost as a result of an incident." Such
restoration should occur "where there is a need to do so, and
where feasible and cost-effective means to accomplish restoration
are available," the agency said. The rule's focus on restoration
will "eliminate unneeded assessment studies and prevent
unnecessary adversarial conflicts over misunderstood goals of
trustees," according to NOAA. The agency claimed that the rule
"invites RPs to act cooperatively and responsibly to seek
expeditious and cost-effective restoration" and that it
constrains trustees' actions "to those necessary to achieve OPA's
restoration goals." As a result, according to NOAA, "costs and
damages will not be excessive or unpredictable." For further
information, see pages 439 to 510 of Vol. 61, No. 4 of the
Federal Register, or contact: Linda Burlington, Office of General
Counsel Natural Resources, NOAA, 1315 East-West Highway,
Room 15132, Silver Spring, MD 20910; Tel: 301-713-1217; Fax: 301-
713-1229.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

UNDERWATER PIPELINE RUPTURE CAUSES MAJOR SPILL IN RUSSIA'S
SOUTHERN URAL MOUNTAINS.

A large but undetermined amount of crude oil spilled from an
underwater pipeline into the Belaya River near the town of Ufa in
Russia's Ural mountains on 26 December, when the line ruptured as
a result of corrosion, according to Russia's Emergencies
Ministry. Uralsibnefteprovod, the regional oil transport company
that operates the pipeline, shut down the 28-inch-diameter line
after detecting a drop in its operating pressure. The company
initially estimated that 100 metric tons of crude oil had leaked
from the ruptured pipeline, but recent reports from Russia's
ITAR-TASS news agency indicate that the spillage may have been
much higher. The spilled oil from the pipeline has flowed
downstream beneath the frozen surface of the Belaya River and,
according to some reports, has reached as far as the Tatarstan
region, which is about 100 miles from Ufa. According to a
spokesman for Russia's Emergencies Ministry, response crews have
set fire to the oil in open areas of the river to prevent it from
spreading. In addition, the crews have deployed boom to contain
the oil and have used skimming equipment to recover the oil
contained within the boomed areas. As of 7 January, the crews had
recovered 664 metric tons of an oil-water mixture from the river,
including up to 100 metric tons of crude oil. Severe cold and
adverse weather conditions have reportedly hampered the cleanup
efforts. Although the Belaya River provides drinking water for
Ufa, the Emergencies Ministry spokesman noted that the spill will
probably not impact Ufa's water supplies, because the pipeline
rupture occurred downstream from the town's water intakes on the
river. In a separate incident during 1989, a total of 765 people
were killed as a result of a massive explosion in a natural gas
liquids pipeline near Ufa (OPB, 17 July 1991, p.8). The incident
occurred when vapor leaking from the pipeline was ignited by two
trains passing through the vapor cloud.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

SOLAS AMENDMENTS MANDATE ENHANCED INSPECTION PROGRAM FOR AGING
TANKERS AND BULKERS.

Aging oil tankers and bulk carriers will be subjected to more
rigorous surveys under major amendments to the International
Maritime Organization's (IMO's) 1974 International Convention for
the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS). The amendments, which took
effect on 1 January, were adopted during May 1994 by a special
diplomatic conference of the parties to SOLAS (OPB, 3 June 1994,
p.1). At the conference, delegates adopted the amendments as part
of three new chapters to SOLAS--Chapters IX, X, and XI.
Chapter XI contains the new vessel survey requirements.
Chapter X, which contains a code of safety requirements for high-
speed vessels, also took effect on 1 January. Chapter IX, which
makes mandatory IMO's International Safety Management Code, will
enter into force on 1 January 1998. "The enhanced program of
inspections was developed by IMO as a result of increasing
concern about the aging of the world merchant shipping fleet,"
according to IMO spokesman Roger Kohn. "This is particularly true
of tankers and bulk carriers, the majority of which are now
between 15 and 20 years of age," Kohn said. He noted that the
enhanced inspections "pay special attention to corrosion." During
the inspections, "coatings and tank-corrosion prevention systems
must be thoroughly checked, and measurements must be carried out
to check the thickness of plates," according to Kohn. In addition
to mandating new survey requirements, Chapter XI contains three
other regulations intended to improve ship safety. One regulation
requires that all cargo vessels of 300 GT or more and most
passenger ships obtain a valid IMO ship identification number.
Another regulation requires classification societies that perform
vessel surveys on behalf of flag-state administrations to follow
guidelines adopted during 1993 by the IMO Assembly. The third
regulation gives port-state control officers the authority to
evaluate the operators of a foreign-flag ship "when there are
clear grounds for believing that the master or crew are not
familiar with essential shipboard procedures relating to the
safety of ships." The port-state officers may detain that vessel
if their evaluation shows that the crew has inadequate knowledge
of the vessel's operations.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

ENVIRONMENT CANADA REPORT EXAMINES BEHAVIOR OF OIL IN COARSE
SEDIMENTS.

Although oil penetrates to greater depths on beaches with coarse
sediments than it does on beaches with fine sediments, oil is
less likely to form lasting deposits in coarse sediments than it
is in fine sediments, according to a draft report by Environment
Canada's Emergencies Science Division. The report, entitled
Stranded Oil in Coarse Sediment Experiments, presents the
preliminary results of research sponsored by Environment Canada
to examine the relationship between sediment particle size and
the penetration and retention of oil in beach sediments.
According to the report, "in all test series, oil penetrated to
greater depths in coarser sediments." In addition, the report
noted that, for most types of oil, retention "generally decreased
in coarser sediments." However, the report also said that the
relationship between oil retention and sediment particle sizes
"differed markedly for the various crude oils tested." In the
experiments, Alaskan North Slope crude oil exhibited "one of the
most unusual sediment retention relationships, with moderate
retention in finer sediments and very low retention in coarse
sediments," the report said. It noted that the oil retention of
Alaskan North Slope crude oil in the experiments was consistent
with the behavior of that type of oil after it spilled from the
Exxon Valdez in Prince William Sound, Alaska, during 1989.
According to the report, "of all the oils tested, Alaskan North
Slope crude oil would be the most likely to freely percolate
through coarse surface sediments and to be retained in high
concentrations in the underlying fine sediments," the report
said. In fact, following the Exxon Valdez spill, "most of the
cleanup effort that occurred during 1990, 1991, and 1992 was
directed towards the cleaning of subsurface oil on coarse
sediment beaches with fine underlying sediments, even though this
coastal type represented a relatively small proportion of the
total coastline oiled," the report said. For a copy of the draft
report (EE-155), at no cost, contact: Environment Canada,
Emergencies Science Division, 3439 River Road, Ottawa,
Ontario K1A 0H3; Tel: 613-991-1114; Fax: 613-991-9485.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

WORLD SPILL BRIEFS.

An undetermined amount of crude oil spilled from a pipeline
outside the city of Araquita in northeastern Colombia on
8 January, after rebel troops sabotaged the pipeline with
explosives, according to a spokesman for Ecopetrol, the state-
owned company that operates the line. Although Ecopetrol shut
down the pipeline after the attack, the company has been unable
to begin repairing the damaged segment due to continuing
skirmishes between Colombian government soldiers and rebel forces
from the National Liberation Army. According to the Ecopetrol
spokesman, the National Liberation Army, which has carried out
numerous acts of sabotage in recent years against the company's
oil pipelines, claimed responsibility for the recent pipeline
attack.

A 32-inch-diameter pipeline ruptured due to corrosion and spilled
an undetermined amount of crude oil on 24 December about 60 miles
west of Ukhta in the Russia's northern Komi Republic, according
to Russia's ITAR-TASS news agency. Crews from Transneft, the
state-owned company that operates the pipeline, have reportedly
replaced a 165-foot-long section of the damaged line. Although
news reports initially indicated that the spilled oil from the
pipeline had contaminated the Ropcha River, Transneft officials
have since said that the oil did not enter the river. Transneft
has also estimated that it will take at least three weeks to
clean up the spill. One of the largest pipeline spills in world
history occurred during the fall of 1994 near Usinsk in the Komi
Republic, about 200 miles northeast of the recent pipeline
rupture (OPB, 4 Nov. 1994, p.1). In April 1995, a natural gas
pipeline exploded in a wooded area about 8 miles outside of
Ukhta, sending flames hundreds of feet into the air and burning
several acres of forest (OPB, 5 May 1995, p.6).

The 97,689-DWT Bahamian tanker Alandia Wave spilled an estimated
500 to 1,000 gallons of crude oil on 21 December while loading
oil at the British Petroleum terminal on the Sullom Voe in
Shetland, U.K., according to a spokesman for the Shetland Islands
Council. The oil apparently leaked from a crack in the tanker's
No. 1 port cargo tank, but surveyors have not yet determined what
caused the crack. After determining the source of the spill, the
Alandia Wave's crew was able to minimize the spillage by
transferring oil from the No. 1 tank to other tanks aboard the
vessel. Although response crews from the Shetland Islands Council
and British Petroleum deployed boom to contain the spill, a small
amount of the spilled oil came ashore on a beach at Sella Ness.

The government of Singapore recently ordered Singapore Refining
Co. to pay a fine of $150,000 Singapore ($1.00 Singapore =
$0.70 U.S.) in connection with an oil spill that occurred on
25 August 1995 from a pipeline at the company's refinery in Palau
Merlimau, off Singapore's southwestern coast, according to news
reports (OPB, 8 Sept. 1995, p.7). About 300 metric tons of heavy
fuel oil leaked from the pipeline through a valve that was
accidentally left open during an oil transfer operation. The
spilled oil formed a 60-square-kilometer slick and came ashore at
beaches on the tourist resort island of Sentosa, about
12 kilometers east of the refinery. An estimated $1.7 million
Singapore was spent to clean up the spill.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
GOLOB'S OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN via NewsNet
January 12, 1996

OIL POLLUTION BULLETIN HOTLINE.

NRC and Edison Chouest Offshore Inc. of Galliano, Louisiana, have
reached an agreement in principle to integrate Chouest's staff
and fleet of offshore vessels into NRC's network of oil spill
response resources. According to NRC, Chouest currently employs a
staff of about 600 people and operates a fleet of 57 vessels in
the Gulf of Mexico, as well as on the U.S. Atlantic and Pacific
coasts. With the addition of the Chouest fleet, NRC's Marine
Resource Network now consists of more than 800 crew boats, supply
vessels, utility vessels, barges, and tugboats throughout the
United States. "We are pleased to be working with Chouest, which
is represented by a highly professional group of employees,"
commented NRC President Mark Miller. "NRC believes that the key
to rapid response to an oil spill is access to people,
specialized equipment, and marine resources," Miller said. For
further information, contact: Mark Miller, NRC, 460 Edwards
Avenue, P.O. Box 609, Calverton, NY 11933; Tel: 516-369-8644;
Fax: 516-369-4908.

In the first application of its "direct final rule" process, USCG
recently issued a final rule to remove the text of the
International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea
(COLREGS) from the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).
According to USCG, the COLREGS text, which is found in 33 CFR
Part 81, duplicates text also found in the United States Code and
is therefore unnecessary. Under the direct final rule process,
USCG may issue a final rule without first publishing it as a
proposed rule, provided that the agency does not expect to
receive any adverse comments on the final rule. If USCG receives
no adverse comments on the final rule within a specified time
period, the rule takes effect. If adverse comments are received
during that period, USCG must publish a notice in the Federal
Register retracting or modifying the rule. The recent final rule
removing the COLREGS text from the CFR will take effect on
1 April, unless adverse comments are received. For further
information, see pages 8 and 9 of Vol. 61, No. 1 of the Federal
Register, or contact: Diane Schneider Appleby, USCG Headquarters,
2100 Second Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20593-0001; Tel: 202-
267-0352.

The U.S. Department of Transportation's (DOT's) Research and
Special Programs Administration (RSPA) plans to hold a public
workshop on 18 January in Washington, D.C., to solicit comments
on the agency's recently proposed criteria for identifying
"unusually sensitive" environmental areas in close proximity to
gas and hazardous liquid pipelines (OPB, 16 June 1995, p.8).
According to RSPA, many federal, state, and local regulations,
including RSPA's current rules on pipelines that carry oil and
other hazardous liquids, refer to "environmentally sensitive"
areas without clearly defining what constitutes such areas.
Persons who are unable to attend the workshop may submit written
comments; these comments are due by 5 February. For further
information, see pages 342 to 344 of Vol. 61, No. 3 of the
Federal Register, or contact: Christina Sames, RSPA, DOT,
400 Seventh Street, S.W., Washington, DC 20590-0001; Tel: 202-
366-4561.

On 28 December, USCG issued a supplemental notice of proposed
rulemaking (SNPRM) on structural measures designed to reduce the
amount of oil spilled from non-double-hull tankers until their
mandatory retirement from service in U.S. waters under USCG's
double-hull regulations (OPB, 29 Dec. 1995, p.5). Although OPB
had expected to provide full coverage of the SNPRM in this issue,
the release of USCG's final guidelines on the OSRO classification
process and NOAA's final NRDA rule has delayed OPB's coverage of
the SNPRM until next issue.

For further information on any article in this issue, call the
OPB Hotline at Tel: 617-491-5100.



<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>