
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B24-95</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA053-000896-B001-29</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://isse.gmu.edu:80/students/pfarrell/nist/tis.html 129.174.40.15 19970123200711 text/html 29957
HTTP/1.0 200 Document follows
Date: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 20:05:58 GMT
Server: NCSA/1.5.2
Last-modified: Tue, 02 Jan 1996 16:22:22 GMT
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 29773
</DOCHDR>
<html><title>TIS presentation, NIST September meeting</title>
<body>
<pre>
   [Handout at Key Escrow Issues Meeting, at NIST,
   Gaithersburg, Maryland, September 6, 1995.]


   Thoughts on the NIST Key Escrow Issues Meeting Discussion
   Papers

   Trusted Information Systems

   September 1, 1995


   1    Introduction

   Trusted Information Systems(TIS) is pleased to have the
   opportunity to present a set of thoughts on Discussion
   Papers 1 and 2 prepared by NIST for the September 6-7,
   1995, Key Escrow Issues Meeting. It is exciting to see
   progress made on the export of better cryptography. The
   goal of the government to accept products into the new
   program by the end of this year is an impressive one.

   Towards that goal, TIS offers the following comments on the
   NIST discussion papers.


   2    Criteria for Criteria

   It is very important that the final criteria are, as stated
   in the NIST discussion paper, *the objectives, but not the
   exact technical method(s), by which those objectives are
   satisfied*. The criteria must also be

   +    Relevant -- the criteria must focus on meeting the
        government's goals.

   +    Objective -- the criteria cannot be subject to
        interpretation. Vendors cannot use criteria that
        change with each review of a product or each new
        product.

   +    Achievable -- the criteria must be implementable by
        vendors. This will meet the goal of both government
        and industry to export better cryptography.

   +    Acceptable -- the criteria must be accepted by, and
        result in systems that are accepted by:

        - the U.S. government with respect to export policy,

        - industry with respect to the vendors implementing
          compliant systems,

        - users who will buy the products, and

        - the international community that will 
          import compliant products.

   One must be careful not to start down the *How to* path for
   each of the issues presented. That is the job of each
   solution provider. Even though the issues begin with *how
   to*, attention must instead be focused on the particular
   government interest at issue, and each solution provider
   must be allowed to determine how to address that interest.

   The following include a few other traps that the criteria
   process must avoid.


   2.1  Don't Specify Commercial Criteria

   The criteria process must focus on the criteria that the
   government will use for determining compliance for export.
   There are plenty of additional relevant criteria for
   creating a good escrow encryption system. The job is not to
   specify the best, or even a good, system. Rather, it is to
   make sure that applicable government requirements are
   specified, and no more.

   2.2  Don't Exceed the Minimum

   The criteria process must focus on the minimum requirements
   necessary to achieve compliance for export. The
   Clipper/Capstone LEAF represents a starting point for the
   functionality of escrowed communication. The criteria must
   not exceed that functionality.

   2.3  Don't Allow Criteria Creep

   Criteria Creep must be avoided. Once criteria for export
   are established, they should remain static. Each vendor
   should be evaluated against the same criteria.

   2.4  Don't Solve the Dual Rogue Problem

   The criteria process should not attempt to solve the dual
   rogue (two cooperating entities bypassing key escrow)
   problem. Clipper does not solve it. Mike Nelson at the
   August 17 announcement clearly stated that compliant
   solutions are not expected to solve it. The criteria
   process must not attempt to write criteria that try to
   solve it.

   2.5  Don't Over Protect

   Any criteria process dealing with protection of key escrow
   mechanisms should evaluate whether it is easier or cheaper
   to write or procure compatible non-escrowed encryption than
   to disable the escrow mechanism of a compliant product.
   Remember that the use of key escrow-based encryption is not
   required for anyone, domestically or internationally. There
   will always be other choices available. The criteria should
   be that defeating the exportable key escrow mechanisms
   cannot be accomplished at a cost lower than using an
   alternative. This is clearly a balancing act of risk
   management; there are no absolute answers.


   3    Nomenclature

   The software key escrow community must use a generic
   nomenclature that does not suggest any particular
   implementation or solution. Unfortunately, the NIST issues
   are written using terms that in many cases specifically
   describe the Clipper implementation. For example, the
   criteria should be written to refer to *third party agents*
   instead of key escrow agents. Not all third party agents
   are key escrow agents. The criteria should deal with
   *decrypting information* instead of keys. The exact
   placement of the keys may differ with each solution. In
   general, the terms used in the criteria should not suggest
   an implementation or make any assumptions about an
   implementation.


   4    Issues for Escrowed Encryption Products

   The following sections address each of the issues raised in
   the NIST Discussion Paper #1. Each section begins with the
   *issue as stated by NIST*.

   4.1  Avoiding Multiple Encryption

        *How can the product be designed so as to prevent
        doubling (or tripling, etc.) the key space of the
        algorithm?*

   Ensuring that the product itself does not provide a feature
   of doubling or tripling the key space of encryption is a
   relevant and reasonable requirement. It is in the
   government's interest to mitigate the risk of a breakdown
   of the key escrow mechanism by limiting the key space
   allowed by compliant products. It is also necessary to
   ensure that the product cannot be modified to allow
   doubling or tripling from within a compliant product. This
   requires the same protections, and the same level of
   assurance, as the later issue of protecting the product
   from being modified to disable the escrow mechanism.

   However, ensuring that the product cannot be used multiple
   times to double or triple encryption constitutes trying to
   solve the dual rogue problem. Any use of a product outside
   of its features requires the cooperation of both the
   encrypting and decrypting party. Even though this is the
   dual rogue problem, because it is of special interest to
   the government, it should be explored in more detail.

   First, if a compliant product is used multiple times, then
   each key will be escrowed. Second, if a product is to
   prevent itself from being used multiple times, then it must
   maintain state about how it was used. A rogue application
   can always be written that will require 1 more bit of state
   than the product maintains, thus defeating any mechanism
   attempting to prevent multiple passes over the same data.

   4.2  Disabling Key Escrow Mechanism

        *How can products be made resistant to alteration that
        would disable or circumvent the key escrow mechanism?
        How can the "static patch" problem be avoided? How can
        this be tested?*

   Resisting the disabling or circumvention of the key escrow
   mechanism is a relevant and reasonable export requirement.
   This requirement appears in several forms in the issue
   list. It should probably be stated in the positive, that
   escrowed encryption products must always use the escrow
   feature when encrypting. This criterion must apply

   +    during product distribution and initialization,

   +    in spite of attempts to disable the escrow mechanism
        by altering the software, and

   +    in spite of postprocessing the output from a compliant
        product.

   Each of these issues needs to be looked at separately.

   The first issue is that the escrow feature is always used
   for a successful encryption, even if encryption is
   attempted during product distribution and initialization.
   This prevents a user from subverting the system by failing
   to perform some initialization step. There are several
   methods for vendors to meet this criteria.

   Protecting the integrity of the software presents
   interesting problems but gives rise to creative solutions
   as well. The ability to meet any criteria relies on the
   integrity of the software. It is also very important for
   vendors to identify the integrity boundary of their
   products. There will be a subset of the product that is
   integrity protected. Alteration of the portion of the
   product that is not integrity protected should not affect
   the compliance of the product with any of the agreed-upon
   criteria.

   Postprocessing the cyphertext to remove the escrow
   information presents certain difficult issues and needs to
   be addressed separately from the integrity of the software.
   Since postprocessing can be done outside of the escrowed
   encryption product, the only way to prevent it is to make
   it detectable or harder to accomplish than using a
   different encryption method. Remember, too, that the
   purpose of having private escrow systems is to provide
   users with functionality as well. Postprocessing the
   cyphertext removes the user's ability to use the features
   of the escrow system as well.

   4.3  Access To Escrow Information

        *What mechanisms must be designed into encryption
        products to allow authorized access to escrowed keys?
        This likely includes the identity of the key escrow
        agent(s) and a serial number for the key escrow agent
        to use to identify the key(s)/component(s) necessary
        to decrypt the message. What other information will be
        necessary to be provided to the escrw agent to
        identify the necessary key(s)/components(s)? Are there
        other comparable viable approaches?*

   This issue should to be restated to focus on the objective,
   rather than on the mechanisms. Both the government's and
   the commercial user's objective is that each encrypted
   object identifies the information necessary for the
   decryption of the object. This identity information must be
   available to law enforcement (and the user, for that
   matter) without any cryptographic processing.

   4.4  Non-escrowed Use

        *How can products be made so that they do not function
        with non-escrowed products (or tampered escrowed
        products)? How can this be tested?*

   There are two separate reasons for this issue. This issue
   addresses both the prevention of postprocessing of messages
   and the promotion of the use of escrow-enabled products.

   The first issue in nonescrowed use is the prevention of
   postprocessing of messages to remove the escrow
   information. If prevention of this attack is the goal, then
   we need to focus on this as a threat and decide on possible
   countermeasures. Outlawing interoperability is only one
   possible countermeasure.

   The second issue is the promotion of the proliferation of
   escrow-enabled products. The promotion of the use of the
   products is not a relevant requirement for the export of
   the product. Whether a product, or technology, succeeds or
   fails in the marketplace is not a relevant criteria for
   export. Furthermore, requiring compliant products to refuse
   interaction with noncompliant products may, in fact, have
   the opposite effect. The following scenarios will
   illustrate the point.

   +    *Compliant xmtr and compliant rcvr*. There is no issue
        here.

   +    *Compliant xmtr and noncompliant rcvr*. There should
        be no issue here. Since the xmtr is compliant, the
        information necessary for law enforcement access will
        be transmitted, and law enforcement needs are met.

   +    *Noncompliant xmtr and compliant rcvr*. Here is the
        alleged problem. The xmtr does not transmit the
        information necessary for law enforcement. However, in
        the world of commercial business, the receiver cannot
        dictate how people send information, so in order to be
        compatible with the noncompliant xmtr the receiver
        moves to a noncompliant product. This hinders the use
        of escrow enabled technology. Rather than having at
        least one side of the conversation using this
        technology, forcing the issue will result in no side
        using it.

   +    *Noncompliant xmtr and noncompliant rcvr*. There is no
        issue here. Neither of the products falls under these
        criteria.

   Do not underestimate the need for interoperability for
   product vendors. This issue can take many forms. There are
   already interoperability standards for encrypted electronic
   mail, such as the MIME Object Security Standard (MOSS). If
   new products cannot interoperate with the existing
   products, then the early adopters will have no one to
   communicate with and will not promote the product.

   A different form of the interoperability problem is within
   a product family. If a company makes an investment in one
   of the third party DES encryption products available today
   and later purchases compliant exportable products for use
   overseas, this would set up the compliant/noncompliant
   problem. It is unlikely that a company will also upgrade
   all of its domestic products. It is more likely that they
   will find an interoperable product overseas.

   Even if product vendors do not achieve full
   interoperability between compliant and noncompliant
   products due to technical issue and design decisions, a
   government mandate against interoperability is not an
   answer. Allowing the marketplace to control
   interoperability lets it decide how important it is in
   order to sell a product. Vendors will provide what is
   necessary in order to sell their products. The government
   criteria should not be used as a reason for products to
   fail. That is a lose-lose proposition.

   4.5  Limiting Surveillance

        *How can products be designed so that information both
        sent and received by the user can be decrypted without
        release of keys of other users?*

   This issue must be looked at with an understanding of the
   nature of the communication method. Electronic mail is a
   store-and-forward, one-way communication. The information
   is protected by the sender until the receiver receives the
   message and completes its half of the key exchange and
   decryption. It is not realistic to expect to be able to
   read a subject's incoming mail without the release of some
   information from the escrow system of the transmitter. A
   Capstone LEAF in a mail message does not do this. A new
   system should not have to, either.

   Access to both directions of communication with the release
   of information from the third party for only one of the
   users is reasonable for two-way communication.



   4.6  Practical Key Access

        *How can mechanisms be designed so that repeated
        involvement of escrow agents is not required for
        decryption for multiple files/messages during the
        specified access period?*

   Here is an example of the wording implying a specific
   solution. Not all systems have escrow agents. The true
   issue for the government is that there is some range of
   acceptable interaction with the escrow system (a collection
   of elements) for repeated decryptions under the same
   authorization. Every system proposed will be involved in
   every decryption. The issue is the form of that
   interaction. The eventual criteria must specify what is
   expected both in the form of human interaction and in the
   form of automated interaction.

   4.7  Assurance That Keys Are Escrowed

        *How can it be assured that key escrow products are
        indeed satisfactorily escrowed? For example, products
        could be required to be escrowed at time of
        manufacture or be made inoperable until properly
        escrowed.*

   This is a subset of Disabling Key Escrow. Phrased
   differently, can one circumvent key escrow specifically by
   not initializing the system properly? This should be
   discussed with the other attacks to disable or circumvent
   key escrow.

   4.8  Ability to Re-Escrow Keys

        *How can products be designed so that new keys can be
        escrowed at the user's discretion with a U.S.
        Government approved escrow agent?*

   It is not clear what this issue means. It suggests two
   different criteria. First, it suggests that if the
   underlying cryptographic system allows, or even expects,
   users to periodically change the keys that they use, then
   the escrow system must also allow users to do this. It is
   not relevant to the government's interests to require a
   system to change keys. It is good practice to change keys,
   but the government criteria must be limited to those issues
   relevant to meeting the government interests.

   Second, this issue suggests that there are multiple third
   party agents to choose from. It is vital to the commercial
   acceptance of escrowed encryption that the criteria allow
   for a choice of third party agent.

   4.9  Certified Escrow Agents

        *Can products be designed so that only escrow agents
        certified by the U.S. Government (domestic, or under
        suitable arrangements, foreign) are utilized? What
        should be the criteria for an acceptable U.S. escrow
        agent?*

   It is relevant that escrow systems make sure that they are
   dealing with valid agents for the proper operation of the
   system. However, whether the government is in a position to
   certify agents is another question.

   The entire issue of government certification of escrow
   agents and the criteria used should be separated from the
   discussion of the product criteria. This issue should be
   removed from the product list and discussed with the escrow
   agent issues list.

   5    Criteria for Key Escrow Agents

   The following sections address each of the issues raised in
   the NIST Discussion Paper #2. Each section begins with the
   issue as stated by NIST. The section titles are the
   editor's.

   Before examining this set of issues, it is necessary to
   examine the basis for establishing any criteria for third
   party agents. There is no basis for the certification of
   escrow agents for use within the United States. There is no
   legal authority or budget appropriation for a certification
   activity. The only basis would be for escrow agents in the
   United States used in conjunction with exported escrowed
   products. Remember, these criteria are only for the purpose
   of determining exportability.

   However, most importing nations of escrowed encryption will
   require the entire system to be subject to their laws. They
   will not import the encryption products without the
   software or hardware used by the third party agents. The
   real issue is the criteria for allowing export of the
   software and systems used by the third party agents, not
   the criteria for approving the organizations within the US.
   For purely domestic use, there is no basis for approving
   the agents. Authorizing legislation would be required to
   form a basis for any criteria. Futhermore, it is not
   entirely clear that government specified criteria
   regulating a domestic activity for the purpose of achieving
   exportability would be considered to have a rational basis
   by a court. Were such legislation to pass muster, however,
   it would have to fundamentally accept that the use of
   escrowed encryption domestically is a voluntary action that
   a user might take in order to gain the benefits of
   emergency recovery or other authorized third party access.
   Appropriation legislation would also be required to allow
   any licensing authority to exist and function. Given the
   pace of legislation, and the current reluctance to expand
   government operations, it is imperative that the deployment
   of these systems not rely on the passage of legislation.

   5.1  Exclusion of Organizations

        *What kinds of organizations should be excluded from
        consideration as approved key escrow agents?*

   Criteria must be positive and objective. Even discussing
   the concept of exclusion sets the stage for charges of
   restraint of trade and discrimination. There can be no
   preconceived notion about who might be able to meet a set
   of criteria.

   5.2  Legal Agreements

        *What sort of legal agreement between the government
        and the key escrow agent is necessary to stipulate the
        responsibilities of the agent? Should this include the
        terms and conditions under which release of a key is
        required?*

   This is not a criteria for third party agents. Any third
   party agent is subject to the laws of its local
   jurisdiction. If located in the United States, a third
   party agent is subject to Federal, State, and local laws.
   If current law does not address key escrow with enough
   specificity, perhaps legislation would be in order.
   Complying with any new legislation would not require the
   certification of third party agents; it would just mean
   they could comply more uniformly with the laws of their
   respective jurisdictions.

   5.3  Liability

        *How will liability for unauthorized release of key be
        handled?*

   This is not a relevant concern of the government. Civil
   liability is entirely a business concern of the third party
   agent, not a criteria of the government. Third party agents
   will be set up to be in business and to stay in business.
   State statutory law, common law, as well as business
   considerations will dictate how liability is managed.

   5.4  Criminalization

        *Should, for example, intentionally misreleasing or
        destroying a key be criminalized? Should this include
        other actions?*

   Destroying the ability to perform recovery (note the more
   generic wording) is a relevant concern of both the
   government and the business users of an escrow service.
   Misreleasing a key may not hamper the government's ability
   to meet its needs, but it certainly would cause the users
   to lose faith in the escrow system, which could then hamper
   the government's ability to meet its interests. If a third
   party destroys its ability to perform recovery, it has put
   itself out of business, preventing its clients and the
   government from accessing the information of its clients.
   Even so, this is a subject for legislation, not
   certification. Amendments to existing laws may be
   sufficient to provide the requisite deterrent and
   punishment.

   5.5  Investigation Confidentiality

        *How can the government's needs for confidentiality of
        key release be handled?*

   The third party agents are subject to the laws of their
   local jurisdictions. If the authorization presented to the
   third party agent requires confidentiality, and many, if
   not all, do, the government's needs are met. If it does
   not, then the government needs to change the wording of its
   authorizations or create legislation that specifically sets
   forth appropriate confidentiality requirements.

   5.6  Public Key Infrastructure

        *Should approval of key escrow mechanisms be tied to
        a public key infrastructure (for digital signatures
        and other purposes)?*

   It would be beneficial for key escrow mechanisms to use a
   public key infrastructure, but the development and
   deployment of key escrow technology cannot and should not
   be tied to the development and deployment of a public key
   infrastructure.

   5.7  Storage and Safeguarding of Keys

        *What procedures need to be developed for the storage
        and safeguarding of keys?*

   First, the issue really is, what steps has the third party
   taken to make sure that it can perform recovery? The
   government's needs and the needs of the commercial
   marketplace coincide here. The better the security, the
   more trust a customer will have in the third party agent.
   What steps will a third party agent take to make sure that
   it can stay in business? Standard commercial practices will
   naturally increase the level of security.

   5.8  Performance Criteria

        *What are the acceptable performance criteria (e.g.,
        around-the-clock availability, accessibility,
        reliability, etc.) for approved key escrow agents?*

   This is the only relevant criteria where the government's
   needs may exceed those of the commercial marketplace.
   However, unless the government is willing to pay for the
   cost of service above and beyond what is provided to the
   marketplace, one must look at reasonable compromises that
   third party agents can take to meet government needs
   without putting themselves out of business. For example,
   staffing a third party agency 7 days for 24 hours may be
   prohibitive. But making sure that there is always a point
   of contact with a beeper who can respond within a
   reasonable amount of time (measured in hours, not minutes)
   is reasonable.

   5.9  Export of Third Party Components

        *Under what circumstances will key escrow agents in
        foreign countries be approved?*

   This is really the key question. From the U.S. government
   point of view, there must be appropriate bilateral
   agreements with the importing country to allow the
   importing country to retrieve the recovery information and
   share it with the United States in a timely fashion, and
   vice versa. This is not a relevant criteria that a product
   vendor can influence. The government must take the lead in
   auditing and augmenting its international police agreements
   to allow its new policy to work.

   5.10 Approval Process

        *What process will be used to approve escrow agents?
        Costs/who pays?*

   After reviewing the issues, there does not appear to be a
   legal basis and or legitimate need for a government
   approval process. The issues are handled by following the
   laws of the jurisdiction of the third party agent and by
   following good commercial practice. If the government
   determines that new legislation would clarify the
   application of existing laws for the escrowed encryption
   scenario, TIS would welcome discussions on the content of
   such new legislation.


   6    An Alternative to Government Certified Third Party
        Agents

   Commercial vendors are also very concerned about third
   party agents. The failure of any third party agents casts
   a shadow on the entire escrow system. The vendors of key
   escrow systems will do everything that is commercially
   reasonable to ensure the proper and successful operation of
   the third party agents.

   It is expected that vendors will apply commercial criteria
   to "who can license" their systems. Commercial criteria
   could include requiring a corporate certificate of good
   standing, credit reports, and perhaps insurance or bonding
   requirements. Rather than sell escrow components outright,
   vendors may license components to operators with licensing
   terms that specify performance criteria.

   Compare this to government certification. The government
   would still have to operate with objective,
   nondiscriminatory criteria that would include certificates
   of good standing, credit reports, etc. The only additional
   criteria that the government has at its disposal is the
   ability to perform background checks on the principals of
   a third party agent. However, this may not be acceptable to
   commercial business interested in running a third party
   agency domestically. Furthermore, anyone can be a third
   party agent for domestic use today with no restriction
   whatsoever. In order for the government to apply any
   criteria, legislation would have to be passed. This will
   take time. Industry can, and will for its own purposes,
   start applying commercial criteria immediately.

   The marketplace is very incented to ensure the successful
   operation of third party agents. The government interest is
   limited to ensuring that the laws for searches and wiretaps
   can be executed appropriately. Let industry lead in this
   area, and both the government interests and industry
   interests will be met.


   7    Conclusion

   There are several relevant, objective, achievable, and
   acceptable criteria for the export of escrowed encryption
   products that are necessary to meet the interests of the
   government. They must be stated in a clear, generic form
   that captures the true, concise objective to be met and not
   the mechanism to use.

   There are not, however, relevant, objective, achievable,
   and acceptable criteria for the certification of third
   party agents. The government must understand the
   applicability of the existing laws that govern evidence
   gathering and work with the vendors of third party products
   to allow the marketplace to set the standards for third
   party agents.

   [End]






</pre>

Back to Pat's<a href="http://www.isse.gmu.edu/~pfarrell/nistmeeting.html">
NIS&T Key Escrow/Export Meeting</a> page.
<hr>
<A HREF="http://www.isse.gmu.edu/students/pfarrell/disclaimer.html"> 
PDF</a> September 14, 1995  Backto <a href="http://www.isse.gmu.edu/~pfarrell/hotlist.html">Pat's hotlist</a> Backto <a href="http://www.isse.gmu.edu/~pfarrell/index.html">Pat's homepage</a>
</body>
</HTML>
</DOC>