
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B39-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA059-000325-B027-139</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://newsnet.com:80/libiss/fi102.html 205.156.212.5 19970115012457 text/html 65637
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Server: Netscape-Commerce/1.12
Date: Wednesday, 15-Jan-97 01:22:48 GMT
Last-modified: Thursday, 24-Oct-96 22:48:49 GMT
Content-length: 65448
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>/data/webdev/libiss/fi102.html Sample Issue</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="FFFFFF">
<FONT SIZE = 3>
<A NAME=HeadList"></A>
Copyright <BR>
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet <BR>
January 9, 1996<BR>
SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES<BR><BR><BR>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#1"><LI>1996: YEAR OF THE US INVASION?</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(264 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#2"><LI>NYCE MOVES INTO HOME BANKING</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(347 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#3"><LI>BANK INSURANCE REFORM STYMIED</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(497 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#4"><LI>BANNER YEAR FOR US MERGERS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(270 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#5"><LI>BANK OF BOSTON ACQUIRES BAYBANKS</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(285 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#6"><LI>FLEET BUYS NATWEST USA</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(342 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#7"><LI>BRANCHES STILL PROVIDE MOST REVENUE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(300 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
<BR>
<H3>FEATURE</H3>
<UL>
<A HREF = "#8"><LI>THE BENCHMARKING IMPERATIVE</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(3175 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#9"><LI>HONG KONG: COUNTDOWN TO DESTINY</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2799 words)</NOBR></LI>
<A HREF = "#10"><LI>BANKING ON THE LONG HAUL</A>&nbsp&nbsp&nbsp<NOBR>(2004 words)</NOBR></LI>
</UL>
</FONT>
<BR><BR>
<HR>
<PRE>
<A NAME = "1"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

1996: YEAR OF THE US INVASION?

AT THE start of the new year it is perhaps appropriate to consider what
1996 will bring to the world of retail banking.

The year 1995 will probably be remembered for the extraordinary wave of
mergers and acquisitions in the US and, to a lesser extent, in the UK.

In the US, wholesale consolidation of branch networks is under way,
accelerated by the revolution in retail delivery systems. Increasing
liberalisation of interstate branching laws also means that truly
national banks are emerging in that country - something beginning to be
reflected in the marketing campaigns of major banks.

State barriers have not proved an obstacle to the major credit card
banks in the US, which have seen their sophisticated marketing
techniques rewarded by extraordinary returns in their home market.
Latterly, these banks have become increasingly visible abroad,
particularly in Europe, where the credit card market remains full of
potential compared with the saturated US scene.

While, in the short-term, some major conventional US banks may be
preoccupied with effecting mergers in their home market, the
indications are that once the domestic scene has settled down they and
other organisations will surely turn to foreign markets. Already names
such as Citibank, Fidelity Investments and Merrill Lynch International
Bank have accumulated substantial foreign business.

US investment banks have for decades followed their corporate clients
abroad; 1996 may be the year when the revolution in delivery systems
will enable their retail brothers to begin to emulate them in selected
markets and sectors.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "2"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

NYCE MOVES INTO HOME BANKING

NYCE WILL become the first US regional ATM network to announce a full-
service platform for electronic home banking and bill payment. NYCE's
announcement in late December follows a year of new home banking
launches by some 30 large banks, most of which are using personal
finance manager home banking packages from Microsoft and Intuit as a
home banking interface. In addition, Chicago-based regional ATM network
Cash Station has recently announced an outsourcing alliance with
processor EDS for the provision of home banking services.

NYCE, which is based in Hackensack, New Jersey, plans to build its own
home banking processing platform within the NYCE processing system,
which will support home banking and bill payment transactions conducted
over touch-tone phones. Calling its approach "home banking `lite'",
NYCE will offer a low-cost plain-vanilla home banking service for
customers who do not need advanced graphical and consultative functions
that PC personal finance manager (PFM) software packages now provide.

But NYCE's system will also accommodate more sophisticated PFM- driven
home banking programs now offered by many large US banks. NYCE also
plans to pursue state-of-the-art home banking features, like electronic
presentment, which would allow utilities to deliver bills
electronically, as well as alliances with other financial services
providers like insurance firms.

NYCE's technical platform will be based on Tandem fault-tolerant
processing hardware, similar to the system NYCE now uses to run its
core ATM and POS networks, which processed some 350 million
transactions in 1995. Vicorp, a Connecticut-based technology provider,
has already installed "device-independent" software that will manage
interactions, via telephone, screenphones, ATMs and PCs.

The payments infrastructure and experience of regional networks like
NYCE may allow them to offer more cost-efficient services to smaller
institutions, with start-up costs as low as $10,000. Intuit has
recently announced its intention to team up with regional networks to
provide smaller institutions with affordable home banking services. For
its part, NYCE has begun negotiations intended to bring on other
regional networks as equity partners into its new home banking venture.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "3"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

BANK INSURANCE REFORM STYMIED

AN IMPASSE over new bank insurance legislation has all but killed
prospects for repeal in 1996 of the Glass Steagall Act, the legislation
which imposed "fire walls" between the US commercial banking and
securities industries in 1933. Although an agreement is still possible,
repeated attempts to bridge the conflicting interests of the commercial
banking and insurance agents' lobbies failed in 1995, as they did in
1991, leaving further deregulation of US bank insurance in the
uncertain hands of courts and regulators. The result may be that, while
the Supreme Court and the Office of the Controller of the Currency
(OCC) may achieve some piecemeal deregulation of US bank insurance in
the next few years, US banks will still have to cope with a complex and
difficult regulatory climate.

In December, House Banking Committee chairman Jim Leach floated a new
amendment that would strip the "retirement CD" of federal deposit
insurance, which insurers are demanding, if they would agree to abide
by the upcoming decision by the Supreme Court on the right of Barnett
Banks to sell insurance nationally. If Barnett won, all banks would be
able to follow its example, but if Barnett lost, Congress would impose
a five-year moratorium on the expansion of US bank insurance powers.
Both the American Bankers Association and the Independent Insurance
Agents of America opposed Leach's latest compromise.

The Supreme Court's decision on Barnett - which is expected this spring
- could lead to significant deregulation in its own right. The court is
widely expected to uphold Barnett's right to sell insurance nationally
from small towns of under 5,000, owing to a peculiar "small-town
exemption" found in the US Banking Act of 1865. But US bank insurance
would still be regulated at the state level, where local insurance
lobbies are extremely influential. A favourable Supreme Court decision
could also spur the OCC to extend national bank insurance powers beyond
annuities the OCC sanctioned in 1991, to life and other insurance
products.

Largest US Retail Banks end of 1994 and 1995 (assets in $billions)

end of 1994                       end of 1995

 1. Citicorp              250.5    1. Chase Manhattan        304.8
 2. Bank of America       215.5    2. Citicorp*              257.5
 3. Chemical Banking      171.5    3. BankAmerica*           229.9
 4. NationsBank           170.0    4. NationsBank*           195.6
 5. Chase Manhattan       114.0    5. First Chicago NBD      124.2
 6. Banc One               89.0    6. First Union            122.1
 7. First Union            77.3    7. Banc One*               93.9
 8. Keycorp                66.8    8. First Bank System**     91.7
 9. First Chicago          65.9    9. Fleet Financial         90.0
10. PNC                    64.1   10. PNC                     78.2
Top Ten Total           1,284.6                            1,587.9

*  banks not involved in major 1995 acquisitions, defined as adding
more than 15 percent to current assets
** First Bank System's acquisition of First Interstate has not been
decided, due to a hostile bid for First Interstate by Wells Fargo,
which would make Wells No. 7 with $105 billion in assets

Source: American Banker

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "4"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

BANNER YEAR FOR US MERGERS

NINETEEN NINETY five closed out with two significant US bank mergers,
Fleet Financial's acquisition of Natwest Bancorp and Bank of Boston's
purchase of BayBanks (see below). The deals highlighted the rapid
consolidation of the US banking industry. Five years ago, five major
institutions vied for market share in New England, but today just two
banks dominate the region. Fleet and Bank of Boston now control a third
of all deposits in New England, and account for 37 percent of deposits
in Massachusetts and 55 percent in the Boston metropolitan area.

The two deals brought the total value of 1995 US banking mergers and
acquisitions to $73.2 billion, more than the totals for the three
previous years combined, according to SNL Securities in
Charlottesville, Virginia. As a result of 1995 merger activity, the
combined assets of the top 10 US retail banks increased 23 percent to
$1.6 trillion (see chart). The top ten 1995 deals, which involved such
institutions as Chase Manhattan, First Union and First Chicago, were
valued at $47.5 billion, or nearly two- thirds the year's total.

Analysts listed three developments which drove 1995's merger boom:
national banking and branching legislation passed in 1994, flat
industry revenues which spurred large players to pursue technology-
driven consolidation, and a bull stock market which boosted bank shares
and allowed banks to pay for acquisitions with their own stock. All
three factors are still very much in force, and analysts expect bank
mergers to continue, especially as large acquiring institutions like
NationsBank and Bank of America enter the merger arena.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "5"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

BANK OF BOSTON ACQUIRES BAYBANKS

IN A stock deal valued at $2 billion, Bank of Boston agreed to acquire
cross-town rival BayBanks, creating the 15th-largest US commercial bank
with $57.7 billion in assets, and the second- largest New England
institution, after Providence-based Fleet Financial, with $90.0 billion
in assets.

The acquisition will combine BayBanks' consumer business with Bank of
Boston's extensive commercial operations, giving it a 27 percent retail
share in Massachusetts and strengthening its regional position against
Fleet. The deal will also balance the international businesses of Bank
of Boston, a quarter of whose revenue now comes from volatile Latin
America, with an expanded US regional retail franchise.

In an unusual move, all Bank of Boston retail branches will now use the
name of BayBanks, which Bank of Boston chief executive Charles Gifford
called "the top consumer bank in the country", while the holding
company, with its commercial and foreign subsidiaries, will use the
Bank of Boston name. BayBanks' chairman, William Crozier, will become
Bank of Boston's chairman and will continue to direct retail operations
until his retirement in 1998, while Gifford will become chief executive
of the new institution.

Bank of Boston said that the acquisition, which is priced at 2.2 times
BayBanks' book value, will save $190 million in expenses, or 11 percent
of the two banks' combined cost base. Bank of Boston, which will take a
one-time restructuring charge of $140 million, expects to see $50
million in additional annual revenue, or 7.7 percent of current
earnings, after 18 months. The merger will eliminate some 2,000 jobs,
or 8 percent of the banks' combined work force, half by attrition and
half by lay-offs.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "6"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

FLEET BUYS NATWEST USA

IN LATE December, Fleet Financial of Providence, Rhode Island, agreed
to acquire NatWest Bancorp, the US commercial banking operation of
National Westminster PLC, in a deal valued at $3.3 billion.

The deal will expand Fleet's operations beyond its bastion of New
England, by adding 310 branches that will strengthen Fleet's presence
in New York State and give it a foothold in New Jersey. While many
analysts praised the deal's geographic logic and its low price of 1.1
times book value, others questioned Fleet's ability to absorb NatWest
following its acquisition in early 1995 of Shawmut National and its $36
billion in assets (see RBI 321). Fleet will now become the ninth-
largest US commercial bank with $90 billion in assets.

National Westminster had originally put its US unit up for auction in
September, asking $4 billion in cash, a difficult hurdle for US banks,
which almost always finance large acquisitions with stock. Fleet solved
this problem with an unusual deal structure: Fleet will pay $2.7
billion in cash up front, and another $560 million in "earn-out" from
NatWest New York's revenues over the next eight years. Fleet will also
issue $600 million in preferred stock, half of which will go to
National Westminster, and $400 million in debt securities.

The deal marks the end of National Westminster's 25-year attempt to
establish a beachhead in the volatile US banking market. Before the
deal, NatWest Bancorp had become the largest foreign- owned commercial
bank in the US, with $31.1 billion in assets ($13 billion of which will
be sold by Fleet to finance the acquisition). But the bank failed to
create sufficient scale, and blundered into buying several New Jersey
banks before the US real estate market collapse in the early 1990s.
National Westminster ended by spending a total of $3.3 billion buying
its US franchise and then bailing out its loan losses. National
Westminster is expected to use the cash from the sale to acquire a US
asset management firm.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "7"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

BRANCHES STILL PROVIDE MOST REVENUE

NEW RESEARCH by First Manhattan Consulting Group suggests that most US
retail banking profits come from customers who do all their business at
branches and that retail customers who rely exclusively or primarily on
remote delivery still represent a small, if strategically significant,
segment.

Culling data from five major US retail institutions, First Manhattan
found that 40 percent of retail customers rely exclusively on branches,
48 percent use branches and self-service systems, 8 percent use
branches for deposits only, 2 percent use mostly self-service, and the
remaining 2 percent conduct all business through remote delivery
systems.

But the 40 percent who only use branches contribute 60 percent of
retail earnings, while the 10 percent who use self-service except for
deposits contribute 20 percent of profits. The "mixed channel users"
are the least profitable group, representing 50 percent of all retail
accounts but only 20 percent of retail profits.

"We had better be careful in any attempts to radically downsize the
branch system," First Manhattan president James McCormick told an
audience of retail bankers at the recent Retail Delivery Systems
conference in Atlanta. The branch system continues to offer commercial
banks a strategic stronghold in their struggle against non-banks, he
said.

McCormick noted that "mixed-channel" users are the toughest to serve
profitably, and that the best solution is to push these customers
toward remote systems in a way that assures that"self- service
substitutes for branches, not complements them". A number of US
institutions, including Wells Fargo, Bank of America and Keycorp, have
pursued this goal by offering low-cost ATM accounts to customers who
agree to use only remote media for routine transactions. But McCormick
said this approach should be evaluated carefully, lest banks forfeit
valuable transaction revenue.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "8"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

THE BENCHMARKING IMPERATIVE

Richard McManus explains the rationale behind benchmarking and suggests
that bankers have much to learn from both within and outside their
industry

RETAIL BANKS facing increased competition from both traditional and new
rivals are looking for methods to improve the value proposition that
they present to current and prospective customers. As competition
ratchets up those that do not keep pace are doomed. Discriminating
customers will take flight, opting for providers that devise product
and service combinations which more closely match requirements.

In an increasingly competitive environment it is crucial to have a
clear vision of the future and a sure touch in managing change.
Benchmarking can help in both regards if it is properly undertaken.

It helps an organisation shape its future strategy and build necessary
capabilities on the basis of an understanding of what has worked for
other successful organisations. It involves learning from the
experience of others, rather than solely by doing and making one's own
mistakes.

`Piggy-backing' on the success of others makes particular sense when
agility gives an edge in the marketplace. Customers spoilt for choice
are demanding, and winning their support is the aim of each market
participant. But with the pace of change increasing `time-to-market'
also matters. And to create motivating customer propositions more
quickly there is merit in systematically trawling for best practice
both within and outside the financial services sector.

Benchmarking can support step-change improvements in the customer value
proposition. One of the most significant barriers to innovation is past
success. This gives rise to organisational arrogance which takes the
form "we always do things in such and such a way" or "we know best".

Innovative ideas may be dismissed with an assertion that current
success confirms there is no need to change. Or, equally, inflexible
employees may suggest a new approach `invented elsewhere' simply will
not work.

Benchmarking, at the activity level, can highlight organisational
arrogance. But, at the same time, it can kick-start innovation by
generating concrete examples of best practice. Such examples show
innovation to be the prerequisite of survival rather than unnecessary
or infeasible.

Retail banks committed to learning from others can look for creative
approaches which build customer value advantages vis-a- vis competition
without sacrificing speed. The senior management team, armed with an
acute appreciation of evolving customer needs and changing competitor
capabilities, should seek out proven approaches which can be adapted.
The customer-driven retail bank cannot afford either to stand still or
waste time re-inventing the wheel.

Inevitable popularity

It is not surprising that businesses `catch the benchmarking bug' in
competitive marketplaces. In essence, properly undertaken benchmarking
gives senior management the wherewithal to overcome organisational
inertia. It entails the adaptation of demonstrable success to sustain a
customer proposition which is preferred over and above the alternatives
offered by local competition. It generates information which helps
management improve customer value and create defensible advantage.

Benchmarking output is, therefore, an essential raw material of
successful competitive strategy. And in an increasingly international
marketplace the scope of a benchmarking study must be global.

In Strategic Benchmarking, Gregory Watson has charted the evolution of
benchmarking as a developing science. He argues that there are five
generations.

In the `first generation' it is nothing more than reverse engineering.
This reflects the fact that benchmarking became popular initially in
the fields of civil engineering and computer hardware and software. The
challenge was to better the functionality offered by a competitor
product.

In the `second generation' `competitive benchmarking' involves moving
beyond product-oriented examples to include comparisons of the
processes that lie behind the products. The point is that a successful
competitor needs to know both what the market requires and how to
provide it cost effectively.

In the `third generation' `process benchmarking' represents a natural
progression. Enlightened organisations come to realise that the how is
often more important than the what. Product innovation can give
competitive advantage but this can be easily and rapidly copied. But it
is often far more difficult to identify and replicate the processes
which the innovator has pioneered. These processes are not in the
public domain.

In the `third generation' Watson asserts "quality leaders recognised
that they could learn more easily from companies outside their industry
than from competitive studies".

There are two reasons for this claim. The first is that it is often
difficult to share information within an industry without prompting
concerns over anti-competitive behaviour or stalemate competition. The
second is that information from outside an industry often provides more
insight because it forces management to think from first principles
rather than implement incremental improvements. In summary, those
looking outside their immediate industry can expect a willingness to
share information and a freshness of view.

In the `fourth generation' `strategic benchmarking' represents a
further increase in sophistication. Watson suggests it is"a systematic
process for evaluating alternatives, implementing strategies and
improving performance by understanding and adapting strategies from
external partners who participate in an ongoing business alliance".

In essence, it involves a commitment to learn how the business can be
re-engineered to support better customer value propositions. It entails
root and branch change rather than minor improvement and, as a result,
it is likely to give a competitive edge.

Watson argues that the `fifth generation' will be `global
benchmarking'. This will entail businesses scouring the world for best
practices which can valuably be applied to improve their own customer
value propositions. Leading-edge businesses already adopt this
approach.

In planning a global consumer financial services strategy a few years
ago, GE Capital decided to benchmark (among others) American Express,
Citicorp, Deutsche Bank, HSBC, MasterCard, Barclays Bank and AIG. The
point is that a parochial perspective leaves an institution vulnerable.
It is ill-prepared for competition from powerful traditional and non-
traditional rivals in other geographic areas.

The popularity of benchmarking today probably in part reflects the way
in which this practice has evolved. In Watson's `first generation' it
represents nothing more than straightforward competitor analysis. And
no business in a competitive marketplace can argue against this.

But by the `fifth generation' benchmarking has become something quite
different. It is all about trawling internationally to establish which
best practices will underpin motivating customer propositions. It takes
account of the fact that customers are the arbiters of commercial
success. And it recognises that a parochial orientation will not prompt
necessary innovation.

In spite of the way in which benchmarking has evolved, however, there
can be no doubt that even institutions new to the practice need to come
to terms with the fifth generation. It is futile to plan a gradual
migration from first to fifth generation behaviour. An institution
following this course in a competitive market will not survive long
enough to complete it.

Activities and Processes

Benchmarking is predicated upon the notion that all businesses,
including the retail banking business, can be broken down into a series
of activities and processes. This is significant for two reasons. The
first is that some activities and processes, are more important than
others. The second is that comparative measurement both within and
outside an industry sector is possible at this level.

The critical activities and processes are those that add most customer
value. Superiority in undertaking these will lead to significant
comparative advantage in a competitive marketplace. And an organisation
learning from international best practice at the activity and process
level will be capable of world class performance.

So what are the activities and processes that make up the retail
banking business? One possible diagrammatic representation of the
activities is shown in Figure 2. But the processes that lie behind
these activities are necessarily in a state of flux as customers'
tastes change, new technology becomes available and competitor
innovation makes an impact.

In the product management area, for example, design and packaging used
to be all that was required. When a competitor came out with a new
product that met with success in the marketplace others moved quickly
to copy it. But this is where the problem lies.

It is impossible to build a worthwhile advantage vis-a-vis competition
when emulation is relatively easy. And, to use Watson's terminology, as
first and second generation benchmarking became prevalent, product
management needed to evolve. It is now more a question of targeting
particular customer segments by devising a suitable mix of products.

The optimum mix reflects the long-term mission of a retail bank rather
than the recent market success of a local rival. This is important
because it demonstrates that a product range which suits one
institution may be completely inappropriate for another which has a
different customer focus. And as the European enthusiasm for allfinanz
spreads throughout the world it is wise to question whether it is
necessary to add insurance to traditional retail banking products.

The answer depends on the customer focus and whether the retail bank
committed to allfinanz is in the vanguard or merely copying successful
local rivals.

In essence, some but not all customers will buy a comprehensive range
of financial products from one supplier because they lack the
confidence or inclination to shop around. And allfinanz first-movers
will tend to win these customers leaving late converts with the
unenviable task of trying to change the buying behaviour of other
customer segments.

Against this backdrop, it must be wise to benchmark product management
in allfinanz first-movers and to review critically the market response
to late converts.

So much for product management. The marketing and sales activity is
similarly in a state of flux. In the past, this required little more
than some corporate image work and the dissemination of product
information. But enlightened retail banks are now making sure their
marketeers focus on building meaningful customer brands.

As previous issues of CEO Confidential have argued this involves
positioning products and services in such a way as to ensure they are
preferred by customers. Effective brands improve profitability because
the associated benefits of increased market share or superior price
realisation outweigh the costs of brand creation. It is worth noting
that the most profitable retail banks often achieve this position by
charging high prices. This may reflect an uncompetitive market or the
marketeers earning their keep.

It seems that marketing and sales will be more about sophisticated
customer segmentation and carefully tailored communication in the
future. The segmentation will compartmentalise customers on the basis
of buying behaviour and motivation.

It is possible to address such coherent groups in a persuasive way
because they act and think alike. The marketing and sales initiatives
which result from this approach are a far cry from the general
corporate positioning statements on which too many retail banks
currently rely.

When it comes to benchmarking there is no shortage of organisations
that are committed to sophisticated customer segmentation and the
associated tailored communication. In the finance sector, the credit
card companies embracing affinity group marketing lead the way. But the
airline and automotive industries, among others, can also provide
valuable insights.

Distribution management is probably one of the most critical activities
for retail banks today. This reflects the fact that convenience so
often underpins the financial institution selection decision. And
convenience implies ease of access.

In the past, retail banks with a comprehensive branch network were
preferred because branch-based distribution was the norm. Where
alternatives existed either few customer were aware of them or most
were disinclined to use them. But this is all changing.

Direct delivery channels, particularly those using the conventional
phone, are in the ascendancy. And, as traditional retail banks launch
their telephone banking operations, they legitimise and promote this
change in delivery emphasis. This is all well and good but, in a sense,
retail banks with extensive branch networks are playing into the hands
of non-bank rivals without a bricks and mortar heritage.

This is not to say that turning one's back on direct delivery is a
rational choice. But the key distribution management issue facing
traditional retail banks is how to ensure a smooth transition from the
delivery emphasis of the past to that suitable in the future.

The critical concern for the branch-reliant is how to achieve a high
branch utilisation while focusing attention on new delivery channels.
Natural pressure to justify the overhead of new delivery channels can
lead to existing customers being encouraged to migrate from branch
delivery. As a result, an unchanged branch overhead becomes more
burdensome. New efficient costs are overlaid on inefficient costs. But
the net result is a worsening cost position, particularly when
cannibalisation is the norm and, therefore, capacity utilisation in
each channel is poor.

Against this backdrop it is wise to benchmark those institutions that
prove themselves skilful in both managing capacity utilisation and
matching delivery channel to customer segment.

Wells Fargo is an example in the finance sector of a retail bank that
has become more reliant on ATMs and supermarket branches without being
encumbered with the costs of the traditional branch network. But there
are also lessons from other retail businesses.

Some department stores have embraced the shop-within-a-shop concept
where concessions are given to specialist retailers in order to bolster
sales per outlet. Other retailers have built complementary mail order
businesses without wholesale outlet closure. And there are examples in
the restaurant and leisure business of one operator running competing
concepts with distinct delivery formats.

In the finance sector it is wrong to think about delivery as being
completely separate from the product proposition. Quite the reverse is
the case. There must be a fit between the customer segments, the
product and the delivery channel. But the same is true for other retail
concepts that seek to build a brand image.

The delivery approach is an integral part of the brand. And more and
more retail banks will come to realise that different delivery channels
are best targeted at different customer segments.

In the long term, it is probable that many will seek to make different
product and delivery combinations into distinct brands. They will
follow a trail blazed by businesses in other sectors and as a result
benchmarking will help.

In the customer service area the transition which will be important for
most retail banks is from uniform service to customised service. The
emphasis in recent years has been upon introducing and policing higher
service standards. Many banks have recognised that failing to make the
grade in customer service is an unforgivable failing in the service
business. But the desire to improve service has led to inflexible and
sometimes inappropriate standards. Service means different things to
different people and, worse still, it means different things at
different times.

Bearing in mind this and the cost of service provision the astute
retail bank will strive to match service performance to the customer
and the occasion. Those adopting this approach are treating customer
service as a profit rather than a cost centre.

From a benchmarking point of view it is likely that in the financial
services sector the direct providers will make the running. They are
able to make the notion of the `segment of one' an operational reality.

But outside financial services there will be valuable lessons from the
hotel, airline and restaurant business. Each of these grapple with the
problem of treating different customers in different ways within the
same delivery channel. And each suffer from the difficulty faced by
retail banks where the delivery channel is an integral part of the
overall proposition.

In processing and administration the retail bank emphasis is going to
shift away from securing back-office efficiency towards tasks which
improve customer information and facilitate risk management. It is not
that efficiency is a bad thing. It is a prerequisite, but it is also
insufficient for success.

The challenge facing retail banks is not only to do things efficiently
but to do the right things. And the learning organisation realises that
day-to-day interactions with existing customers can provide a wealth of
information to help in customer retention and customer acquisition
initiatives.

Not to put too fine a point on it, failure to build a `feedback loop'
from arrears management to marketing is pure folly unless the aim is to
keep the arrears department busy!

From a benchmarking point of view it is likely that the credit card
companies will pioneer state-of-art processing and administration in
the finance sector. They already ensure that prospective profitability
drives marketing initiatives and they are sophisticated in risk
management.

But outside the finance sector there will be valuable lessons to be
learned from direct response marketing companies and the mail order
industry. And it is possible that government bureaucracies facing
pressures to cut costs may also give some pointers to retail banks. In
many countries the tax authorities, for example, have simplified
administrative tasks and shifted much of the burden onto their clients.
Those embarking on re-engineering of the back-office should take note.

In customer information the retail bank emphasis is going to be upon
garnering the information which is necessary for customer segmentation
and marketing purposes. This will certainly represent far more than
basic demographic information and details on who holds which products.

Information will include the kind of data which enables a retail bank
to cluster customers into groups which are homogenous both in terms of
products purchased and motivating factors. And it will involve an
assessment of profitability by customer and segment.

The key point is that it is such customer information which will help
senior management determine the long-term strategy for the retail bank.
As a result, customer information helps shape the other activities
which make up the retail bank and redefine the important processes. In
company jargon, the organisation becomes customer-driven.

From a benchmarking point of view retail banks and credit card
companies that have got to the bottom of customer profitability will be
well worth studying. And, as with processing and administration, direct
response marketing companies and the mail order industry will provide
some pointers.

In conclusion

Benchmarking on a global basis provides valuable input to the strategy
formulation process. It is not done once and for all but should rather
be a continuous process. This reflects the fact that rivals will
undoubtedly copy success.

A key task for senior management is to set for the organisation
challenging objectives that stand the test of time. This involves
striving for superiority and not purely in those activities and
processes which have the greatest impact upon customer value. The
emphasis selected will reflect the customer focus, the organisational
heritage and the anticipated competitor approach. The benchmarking
questions to be answered are quite simply:

What do we benchmark?  Who do we benchmark?  How do we act on the basis
of benchmarking insight in our organisation?

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "9"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

HONG KONG: COUNTDOWN TO DESTINY

As the year 1997 approaches Andrew Moody assesses the sentiment among
Hong Kong's retail bankers

LIKE MANY other sectors in Hong Kong, retail banking has thrived on the
colony's seemingly never-ending era of economic growth. Over the past
ten years the economy has sustained annual GDP growth of 6 percent.

The main consequence of this - the colony's 6 million people growing
ever wealthier and more middle class - has proved a rich seam for Hong
Kong's retail banks.

These banks, which make up around 30 of the 180 licensed banks in Hong
Kong, have enjoyed levels of profitability which their western
counterparts could only dream of.

Banking profits have been sustained even against a background of zero
real interest rates (the prime rate of 9 percent remains identical to
last year's annual inflation) and narrow spreads.

But as 1997 looms large, uncertainty over Chinese intentions is having
a damaging and uncertain effect on the market. A report to be published
later this month by the Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts that
growth will fall dramatically from 4.5 percent in 1995 to 3.5 percent
this year and just 1.7 percent in 1997.

This could prove damaging for retail banks which, so far, have managed
to avoid large-scale branch closures and panic consolidation which now
so pre-occupies western banks. It may also bring with it bad customers -
 a rarity in Hong Kong where getting into financial difficulties
involves Chinese "loss of face".

Alex Au, vice chairman and chief executive of Hang Seng Bank, the
second largest locally incorporated bank with 138 branches, recognises
the problem.

"The general impression in Hong Kong is that the industry is confronted
by a less favourable trading environment," he says. "The feeling is
that a period of high growth has passed and that a period of
consolidation will follow. But let's not forget that, although growth
may be slowing in the industry, banks in Hong Kong are still among the
most profitable in the world."

If ever the idea meeteth the man then retail banking and the people of
Hong Kong are one of life's happy coincidences. Unlike in the west,
where single bank relationships are the norm, Hong Kong residents have
on average 2.4 accounts in 1.9 banks. This is a territory in which even
little old ladies play the currency markets with their nest egg and
expect their bank to provide them with foreign exchange deposit
accounts with which they can swap currencies at a whim.

Another headache for the banks is the almost frenetic use of the system
by individual customers. The Hongkong Bank estimates its customers
interact with it on average an astonishing 16 times a month.

The precise size of the retail banking market is difficult to gauge,
but $HK 2.1 trillion ($290 billion) is held as deposits with licensed
banks of which savings deposits comprise $HK 418 billion and current
accounts just $HK 115 billion.

Current accounts play a relatively insignificant role in Hong Kong
retail banking with banks regarding deposit accounts and mortgages as
the core product on which to initiate a relationship with a customer.
The newspapers, both Chinese and English, are full of advertisements
for the latest interest rates on deposit account and mortgage products.

"What you want is someone to come in and take a mortgage from you. You
have then got them for at least nine or ten years," says David K.P. Li,
deputy chairman and chief executive of the Bank of East Asia.

"They would typically be a young couple in their late 20s or early 30s
borrowing between $HK1.5 million and $HK1.8 million to buy a 900 square
foot apartment, the repayments on which would set them back around 60
percent of their income. You can then sell them decoration loans,
credit cars, overdrafts and help them with hire purchase for a car," he
adds.

Ironically, in a city brimming with local entrepreneurial talent, the
main product innovators in Hong Kong retail banking are the foreign
banks.

Inextricably linked to the colony, Hongkong Bank and Standard Chartered
wear thin the definition of foreign, but they dominate the market along
with Citibank and the Hang Seng Bank, the latter part of the Hongkong
Bank since the mid-1960s but separately listed and, perhaps to a lesser
degree, the Bank of East Asia.

They have led the way with smart cards, foreign currency deposit
accounts (targeted at mid-range customers in Hong Kong) and tax loans,
a very popular product in a territory where there is no PAYE.

This is something readily conceded by smaller local banks such as the
Dah Sing Bank, a traditional trade finance bank which only moved into
retail in the last few years.

"Basically, I would agree that the bigger foreign banks have dominated
the market. It has been difficult for the smaller banks because of lack
of resources and the cost of technology, but I sense that things are
beginning to change," says Derek Wong, Dah Sing's head of retail.

A yet to be proven catalyst to greater competition could be the slow
but still partial demise of the Hong Kong interest rate cartel which
began two years ago.

Under the cartel, all deposit interest rates used to be fixed weekly by
the Hong Kong Association of Banks. In October 1994 time deposits fixed
for more than one month were deregulated and in January last year it
was left to individual banks to set their rates for deposits over seven
days.

The larger banks remain unhappy about the break-up. According to recent
analysis, it has led to a 5 percent drop in deposits as a result of
falling interest rates.

Hang Seng's Au is worried it has created another uncertainty in the run-
up to 1997. "Although the industry is not against deregulation there is
a concern it has affected bank profitability and that some banks may
compensate by writing more risky loans," he says.

The smaller players believe it has brought much needed competition to
the market, allowing them to buy market share by setting their own
interest rates.

"The status quo ante made no sense really. Deregulation offers more
opportunity to the medium-sized banks. We can offer lower interest
rates as a way of competing against the bigger players. I believe we
can also react faster than the local banks," says Sergio Rial, the
Brazilian general manager of Dutch bank ABN AMRO in Hong Kong.

Western banks have a lot to learn from the luxurious and airy design of
many of the branches in Hong Kong. In a place where land is more
expensive than anywhere else in the world there is no point in building
a shed. Customers too are treated with great courtesy in the banks,
something not typical in the retail business across the whole of Hong
Kong.

"In the UK if you go into a branch to make a transaction, say deposit a
cheque, all you will get is a stamped stub. It astonishes me how people
will deposit large sums of money and virtually have no proof of doing
so. In Hong Kong, the customer will get a printed out receipt precisely
recording the transaction," says Eric Tai, senior executive, retail,
marketing and planning, Hongkong Bank.

The ATM is king in Hong Kong with many more machines per 10,000 of the
population than in the US or the UK. You cannot, in fact, pass an ATM
in Hong Kong without seeing a large gathering of people, many seemingly
not queuing to use it, but perhaps taking time out to worship Mammon,
surely Hong Kong's truest god. Customers not only draw money out at
ATMs but also pay their utility bills with the use of a swipe card.

The love of gadgetry of all kinds would seemingly make Hong Kong ripe
for a direct banking revolution. The fall-off in economic growth would
also seem to necessitate that the banks move faster towards automation
in order to cut costs and retain profit margins. Yet Hong Kong's moves
towards direct delivery are perhaps more primitive than their western
counterparts.

The leading banks have offered telephone banking since 1990 but it is
still very much an in-branch service. The nearest one gets to a UK-
style First Direct operation is a voice response computer at the other
end of the line.

A key reason why the direct banking has not swept the colony is the
problem of getting phone operatives in a land of virtually full
employment.

As Sergio Rial of ABN AMRO explains: "The real barrier to telephone
banking developing in Hong Kong is that professional people don't want
to sit behind a phone all day and in this place they have a right to
choose. Skilled people want to do creative jobs, not pay people's
utility bills and check passwords," he says. "It is one of those things
that has not really caught on and it is presenting real difficulties
for the banks.

"I think what will happen here is that there will be a sudden quantum
leap from ordinary branch banking to PC home-based banking, largely by-
passing the telephone banking stage. This will satisfy the enthusiasm
for gadgetry among Hong Kong people and solve the cost headache for the
banks."

Citibank insists its telephone banking operation has been a success
with its customers. "We have achieved 90 percent satisfaction from our
customers compared to 82 percent from our normal branch banking
business," says Peter Wong, the bank's vice president of global
consumer banking in Hong Kong.

Many of the banks have not as yet embarked on major branch closure
programmes. Hongkong Bank has closed just 20 in the last two years
bringing its total down to 220; the Dah Sing Bank has reduced its
number over the same period from 53 to 43; Citibank has closed mainly
smaller branches, and most of the other banks have only made limited
cutbacks.

There have, however, been moves to segment the market by developing
specific branches for different categories of customers.

The most marked move in this direction has come from the Hongkong Bank,
which now has three different types of branches - select branches for
upmarket customers, standard branches for regular customers and day and
night automated branches.

"Competition for profitable retail customers in the territory has
rarely been keener. We have responded by introducing a strategy that
involves segmenting the way we serve the market," says Hongkong's Eric
Tai. "The select branches will guarantee that we can provide our valued
upmarket customers with the highest quality of service."

The Bank of East Asia services its upmarket customers by delivering
services direct to a customer's office or home. "It is a far more
subtle way of dealing with major clients and, I believe, just as
effective," says Dr Li.

One of the most controversial aspects of banking in Hong Kong is the
stranglehold the larger banks have over the Hong Kong Association of
Banks (HKAB).

It is chaired in rotation by Standard Chartered, Hongkong Bank and now
the Bank of China (which began its first term of office this year).

Many other banks have restricted rights of membership to its committee
and yet the HKAB is all powerful, still setting regulated interest
rates, policing the system and acting as a clearing house.

The Hong Kong Monetary Authority, the supposed central bank, does not
even issue notes (still done by the major banks) and is not even a
banker to the Government.

Dr Li, who apart from running the Bank of East Asia is the sole
financial institution representative on the colony's main law making
body, the Legislative Council or Legco, insists the system must change.

"The whole system is very colonial. It is what Singapore was like 45
years ago. The Hong Kong Association of Banks is an old boys' club with
the chairmanship running between three banks," he says. "The Governor
Chris Patten talks about democracy, but we have one of the most
undemocratic institutions on our own doorstep. The whole system
encourages `yes' people. I certainly thought the cartel worked against
the interests of the consumer."

It is a view echoed by Peter Wong, banking director of Citibank, which
does not always get its own seat on the HKBA committee: "It is not a
level playing field. The HKBA should incorporate more players so the
flow of information can be better."

Li also insists that the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation is
still the lender of last resort and, as such, exerts too much control
over the system. He wants the Hong Kong Monetary Authority to assume
that role officially.

"The colony must have an official lender of last resort. At present,
the smaller banks may have a credit line of say $HK30 million from the
Hongkong Bank and if it exceeds that it may get charged 3 percent above
prime which is very steep," he says.

Hong Kong unlike other banking centres has not yet seen a period of
major consolidation between banks.

The main highlights have been the purchase by the Dah Sing Bank of the
Hong Kong Industrial and Commercial Bank from the Hong Kong government
and then three years ago its acquisition of the Wingon bank from the
Hang Seng Bank. The Dao Heng, the third largest local bank, bought the
Hang Lung Bank in 1989 and the Overseas Trust Bank in 1993.

Opinion is divided as to whether harsher economic conditions will lead
to a spate of more substantial mergers.

 Dr Li again: "I think consolidation will come. I think there are two
or three banks here that would benefit from merger, although I believe
there is a cultural resistance to it. A lot of the local banks are
family controlled and Chinese people don't like to lose face by seeing
their family's heritage being taken over."

Banks, which have stayed clear of retail for generations, are now
moving into the market.

The Dah Sing Bank, traditionally a trade finance bank, has come up with
some of the most aggressive retail products in the marketplace.

One is a credit card which has a generous cash bonus point scheme that
effectively reduces the monthly rate of interest on borrowings to 1.5
percent, significantly less than the 2 percent to 2.5 percent market
average.

Competitors say the card has flopped and is losing money, something
which Derek Wong head of retail denies. "We have built up a lot of
business over the past 18 months with this card. We had a lot of
initial free advertising because it was such a revolutionary new
product," he says.

ABN AMRO, one of the oldest established international banks in Hong
Kong, has also been a late entrant to retail, although it is perhaps
the first non-British European bank to do so. It has also gone in hard
on price undercutting other banks, particularly in mortgages.

General manager Rial insists the strategy has worked, claiming that
retail banking had grown from nil to 30 percent of profits of the bank
in Hong Kong in three years: "It has proved to be a very good move. We
have a leaner structure than many of the other banks and we do not have
the costs of a large staff branch network. We are also an AA bank, so
we can fund ourselves better than many of our competitors," he says.

But the biggest issue in Hong Kong retail banking as in the colony as a
whole has to be 1997. It creates an uncertainty that perhaps only a
financial centre as strong as Hong Kong could withstand. There is a
feeling in the banking community that those who were going to leave
have left and that capital outflows over the coming 18 months will not
be that significant.

"The current situation is no good for business. The name- calling
between the various political interest groups only makes people
nervous. It will be better when the 1997 deadline passes," says
Randolph Sullivan, managing director, Dao Heng Bank.

And ABN AMRO's Rial believes stories of Hong Kong's death as a
financial centre have been greatly exaggerated."Shanghai will not
replace Hong Kong as a regional financial centre in my lifetime at
least. To be a financial centre, the market has to accept that you are
a financial centre and whole infrastructure and framework has to be
there. Hong Kong will continue to be pivotal in Asia," he adds.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
<A NAME = "10"></A>Copyright
RETAIL BANKER INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet
January 9, 1996

BANKING ON THE LONG HAUL

Eric Tai, senior executive, retail marketing and planning with Hongkong
Bank speaks to Andrew Moody

ERIC TAI is senior executive, retail, marketing and planning for
Hongkong Bank, the leading international bank in Asia outside of Japan.
It has 500 offices in 19 countries in Asia and boasts one of the
largest global proprietary ATM networks in the world with 170,000
machines. The bank's earnings have expanded by a compound rate of 22
percent over the past 25 years. Tai began his career in insurance and
had a spell working for Commercial Union in the UK. Before joining
Hongkong Bank, he worked for Citibank and ANZ.

RBI: Retail banking margins in many countries in the west are now very
narrow and there are pressures to cross-sell higher margin products.
Are there similar pressures in Hong Kong?

Eric Tai: Retail banking is more profitable in Hong Kong than in the
UK, for example, on virtually every ratio you want to talk about. This
is partly to do with serving a smaller geographical area and having
customers with a higher savings ratio, around 30 percent compared to 9
percent in the UK. This means you can do things in a more cost
effective way without the same pressures to cross-sell.

But although we are not driven to sell other products to supplement our
retail banking income we do so because people want to buy these
products from the banks, which they trust. The fact that we also make
money out of this is just a win-win situation. We are moving into
derivative products and we have just launched a universal life product
which we haven't sold before.

RBI: Why is banking in Hong Kong so profitable?

ET: It is not because of margins, which are actually narrower than in
the UK or US. Rather, it is lucrative because of Hong Kong's huge trade
flows, because GDP has grown at 7 percent annually since 1980 and
because Hong Kong is the world's largest forex centre and seventh
largest stockmarket. Per capita income now exceeds that of Europe. And
very, very few bank loans go bad.

RBI: Which product do you have to sell a customer in Hong Kong in order
to build a long-term relationship?

ET: We don't have the situation in the UK or the US where everyone is
chasing the cheque account. The market is very different here and they
are not something we chase, although they are free funds. We have
people with heaps of money who don't have cheque accounts.

The coat hanger product and the one we chase is the deposit account
and, to some extent, AssetVantage and PowerVantage. These lock the
customer in on a much more all-round basis than mere transactional
banking. Our strategy works in that we have a relationship with 60
percent to 70 percent of the bankable population.

RBI: What is your view of the partial break up of the Hong Kong
interest rate cartel?

ET: It has certainly put more pressure on margins and has freed up
competitive forces in the marketplace. It has added extra uncertainty
in the marketplace and reduced the predictability and stability of the
economy in the run-up to 1997.

RBI: A number of your rivals are trying to compete heavily on price.
How are you responding to this?

ET: The deposit interest rates offered by some of our competitors could
sometimes be as much as 20 percent higher than ours. There has been
some market buying and market share purchasing, but we have no
intention of being a price driver.

We do a lot of things sufficiently well to reduce the impact of this
and segmenting the market is also a way of coping with the competition.

RBI: How much emphasis has Hongkong Bank placed on providing direct
banking services to its customers?

ET: We have been in direct banking since 1990 in one form or another.
We can do telephone, we can do fax. We are not doing home banking yet
but we are coming along with it. We are currently working with Hongkong
Telecom jointly to do TV banking. All the different interfaces which
are possible technologically are being looked at to find the most cost
effective and most customer receptive forms of direct banking to
implement.

Most banks in Hong Kong have some direct banking offer but it is still
offered within the bank itself rather than by setting up a separate
entity such as First Direct.

RBI: Has the move towards direct banking been driven by cost
considerations?

ET: Retail banks, like all businesses, in Hong Kong, face staff
shortages. Unemployment has held steady at under 3 percent for years,
which has led to a steady rise in personnel costs. At Hongkong Bank,
with our big branch network, the staff shortage has been so acute at
lower levels that we now employ several hundred bank tellers from
China.

The positive aspect of this staff shortage is that we have been forced
to introduce a high level of technology in our branches. We have put in
place machines that automatically provide up-to- date balances on
passbooks, as well as automatic deposit machines which count a
customer's cash deposit and credit it instantly to his or her account.

RBI: Hongkong Bank has taken the somewhat unique step of creating three
distinct types of branches for different grades of customer. What is
the logic behind this?

ET: We believe creating three distinct type of branches is the best
method of delivering the right products and services to the right
customers. So we have what we call select branches for our high grade
customers, standard branches, which are just normal branches, and
automated branches, which operate day and night.

To be a customer at a select branch you have to be invited by a branch
manager or be a user of a particular product. The automated branches
currently have two people in them and with more investment in
technology they will be taken out.

A product which would gain you access to a select branch is
AssetVantage, which is a bundled collection of products sold as a half-
way point to private banking. This is similar to first class service on
an airline. You need to have a minimum deposit of $HK200,000 ($25,900)
and for this you are able to have savings accounts in 30 different
currencies and also gold trade.

We have also launched PowerVantage which is more like business class.
It is intended for younger high-earning customers. We have also
launched a special kind of account aimed at small business operators
called BusinessVantage.

Although we segment the market, however, banking is banking is banking
and you can't really offer a significantly different service to one
customer compared to another.

Banking in Hong Kong is often a social activity and since you are
offered coffee and chocolates at the select branches people often bring
their friends to the bank to do their transactions.

RBI: Are you pandering to the notion that banking in Hong Kong is tied
up with status?

ET: I have a very good friend in the UK and he says to me that he
cannot stand the high street banks because they don't look after him.
They don't treat him as someone special and this is something we try to
avoid here.

RBI: What pressures are there on you to close branches and reduce
staffing to rationalise costs?

ET: We have streamlined branches from around 240 two years ago to 220
now. We will continue to look at cutting the number of branches, but
the actual network remains unchanged.

Essentially what we have done is to close some of the smaller branches
and consolidate the bigger branches. Some of the closures have been
made for safety reasons because we had a fire in one of our branches
and needed improved safety facilities.

We are reducing staffing by using more part-timers so we have the
appropriate number of staff in the branches according to how busy we
are. The more flexible use of people has enabled us to cut staff costs
significantly. We want to find more efficient ways of doing things but,
at the same time, we don't want to reduce the service we provide to
customers. In fact, we set a minimum service standard for a particular
product and work to those benchmarks continually checking our customer
satisfaction levels.

RBI: How much pressure comes from the fact that bank customers use
their banks more regularly in Hong Kong than in other parts of the
world?

ET: Yes, essentially it does. It puts a lot of peak load requirement on
our network, particularly when salaries and social security are paid
into customer accounts.

We have customers in our mid-market sector who will interface with the
bank up to 16 times a month, which is more or less every day, if you
ignore the weekend. The number of transactional interfaces is indeed a
problem and we can only deal with it by having efficient systems.

RBI: How big an impact do you think 1997 will have on the retail
banking market in Hong Kong?

ET: As far as we are concerned we are here for the long haul. If we
didn't believe in China we would not be opening branches there. The
change of sovereignty will naturally have some effect. But I think the
potential is still there to carry on doing business the way we think
best. If some of our customers decide to place their money abroad then
we hope our global network will capture some of it.

RBI: How much Chinese money is coming into Hong Kong?

ET: Heaps. We estimate that China has invested $US20 billion in the
territory.

RBI: How much benefit have you derived from the link up with Midland in
the UK?

ET: I believe it has added to our global presence. These things are
often difficult to quantify. Our customers, however, now have access to
ATM machines in the UK, which can often be very useful.

RBI: How much competition do you face from non-banks?

ET: This is certainly on the increase. It is a big issue for us.
Property developers and retailers are providing their own credit cards.
I think if we don't take them seriously they will become big.

RBI: What is your view of the Hong Kong economy?

ET: It has come off since the property boom of 1993/94 which generated
a lot of income. The credit squeeze in China to reduce inflation there
from 30 percent to around 20 percent has had some effect over the past
12 to 18 months. US demand for Hong Kong goods has also subsided. These
seem to be the main factors behind the fall off in growth.

RBI: How much of a presence do you have in other Asian countries?

ET: The bank's greatest success is in Hong Kong itself but we do have a
significant presence in other countries in the region. We are the
largest foreign bank in Singapore, where we play a role in running the
cheque clearing system. We also have a key presence in India, where we
have 21 branches.

We are constrained from expanding in many countries but have been
helped recently by market liberalisation. In the Philippines, we are
taking advantage of this and are expanding our network from two to
eight branches. We have also been allowed to add two new facilities in
Thailand and are growing steadily in Indonesia.

Indochina is becoming increasingly important for us. We have just
opened an office in Burma and are in the process of upgrading our rep
office in Ho Chi Minh City to a branch.

Copyright:  Lafferty Publications Limited.  All rights reserved





<A HREF ="#HeadList">Back to Headline List</A><BR>
<HR>
</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>