
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B19-369</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA005-000051-B017-331</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://lacebark.ntu.edu.au:80/j_mitroy/sid101/gh1/fair.html 138.80.61.12 19970221151708 text/html 28159
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 21 Feb 1997 14:47:22 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.3
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 27987
Last-modified: Tue, 09 Jul 1996 02:25:43 GMT
</DOCHDR>



<html>

<TITLE>Does Fairness Matter</TITLE>

<PRE>

       Global Warming Negotiations: Does Fairness Matter?
                 H. Peyton Young and Amanda Wolf

     This article looks at the role of equity in a global warming
or climate agreement.  We conclude that equity is a "complicated,
nuanced business that cannot be reduced to simple recipes like
grandfathering present emissions or handing out equal numbers of
permits to everyone.  Equity involves balancing various
considerations -- past responsibility, present practice, ability
to pay, and need....The proposals that have the greatest chance of
success are those that strike a balance between competing
claims....In this sense, equity is not some utopian idea dreamed
up by philosophers; it is the tool that practical negotiators use
to forge consensus."  The paper is forthcoming in: The Brookings
Review, Spring 1992 (VOL 10, NO 2).
     H. Peyton Young is professor of public policy at the
University of Maryland's School of Public Affairs.  Amanda Wolf is
a doctoral student in the same school.  Comments invited: School
of Public Affairs, Morrill Hall, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD. 20742.  e-mail: aw53@umail.umd.edu


INTRODUCTION
     This June the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development will meet in Rio de Janeiro.  High on its agenda will
be global warming, an issue almost unique in its combination of
portent and uncertainty.  By and large, most scientists are
convinced that if emissions of such "greenhouse gases" as carbon
dioxide, nitrous oxide, methane, and chloroflourocarbons go
unchecked, average global temperatures will rise several degrees
Centigrade over the next fifty years and much more over a longer
period.  But there is far less agreement about the local effects
of increasing temperatures -- changing rainfall patterns, incidence
and severity of storms, loss of species, and so forth.
     Yet another complication is the political dimension of global
warming.  Sovereign countries, nominative equals at the negotiating
table, do not perceive themselves as being equally responsible for
contributing to the potential problems or equally able to adapt to
climate-related damages.  The developing world understandably
blames the build-up of greenhouse gases on the developed countries,
who have been spewing industrial effluents into the atmosphere for
well over a century.  The industrialized countries, in turn, blame
some of the poor nations for pursuing unsustainable development
policies, such as converting rainforest to low-yielding cropland
and allowing unchecked population growth, that have dangerous
implications for the ecosystem.
     In spite of scientific uncertainties and political
complexities, the possibility of catastrophic dislocations -- from
storms, droughts, and rising sea levels -- is a powerful motive to
take collective action.  If change were to occur gradually, we
could probably adapt without enormous costs.  But change may not
be gradual.  It is possible, for example, that at some point a
further increase in temperature will cause the permafrost in
northern latitudes to thaw.  This would release a large quantity
of methane (a potent greenhouse gas) which could trigger sudden
temperature increases severe enough to melt vast areas of polar
ice.  The cost of such a catastrophe would be so large that it
clearly makes sense to try to forestall it.
     An agreement to stabilize global climate amounts to taking out
an insurance policy against environmental risk.  Insurance will be
costly, but exactly how costly is difficult to estimate.  Like most
insurance policies, present costs may outweigh the expected savings
in a narrow cost-benefit framework.  But insurance still makes
sense because most people prefer to reduce risk.
     Thus, at the center of the global warming negotiations are
issues of sharing the costs and responsibilities for reducing risk.
Here the terms are not directly those of science or economics, but
those of equity and the fairness of a cost-sharing plan.
     Ministers to the 1990 World Climate Conference sponsored by
the United Nations in Geneva acknowledged in their final communique
the centrality of equity in climate negotiations:  "The principle
of equity and the common but differentiated responsibility of
countries should be the basis of any global response to climate
change."  The success or failure of global warming negotiations may
very well hinge on the delegates' ability to give satisfactory
expression to this elusive concept.

What to Do about Global Warming
     Naturally occurring greenhouse gases reduce the amount of heat
that escapes from the atmosphere.  Since 1850, rising world
population and industrialization have greatly increased the rate
at which these gases are emitted.  Over half the warming comes from
carbon dioxide, which is produced mainly by burning fuels in
automobiles and factories and clearing and burning wood.  Methane
comes from rice paddy residues and other agricultural sources.
Chloroflourocarbons are used in the manufacture of refrigerants,
foams, and aerosol propellants.  For simplicity, greenhouse gas
contributions are often aggregated by country and expressed in
carbon dioxide-equivalent terms.
     There are three broad types of policy responses to the global
warming problem.  One is to moderate warming by restricting
greenhouse gas emissions.  The second is to offset emissions by
increasing the earth's capacity to absorb them.  And the third is
to adapt to a changed environment.  Almost all specific proposals
within these broad approaches involve one or more of the following
policy instruments: taxing greenhouse gas emissions, imposing lump
sum assessments on countries according to their contribution to the
problem (or their ability to pay), and limiting emissions through
a system of quotas or permits.

Emissions Taxes
     The usual argument for an emissions tax is that it creates the
right economic incentives for producers of greenhouse gases.
Producers, whether industrial or individual, will try to reduce
emissions to avoid paying the tax until it is cheaper to pay the
tax than to make further reductions.  If the tax rate for each
greenhouse gas could be set equal to the social cost of additional
emissions, the costs of global warming would be internalized in the
system of economic prices.  Greenhouse gases would be emitted in
exactly the "right" amounts -- namely, the amounts at which the
cost of further reductions outweighs the anticipated benefits.
That is the theory.  The trouble is that it is difficult, given the
economic and scientific uncertainties, to determine the correct tax
rate.
     Leaving aside that difficulty, would an emissions tax be
equitable?  Implicit in an emissions tax is the assumption that
people are entitled to a certain level of well-being -- in this
case, the one they enjoy in the current climate.  According to the
well-known legal principle of just compensation, people have a
right to be free from a "nuisance" created by someone else, or to
be duly compensated for suffering it.  Thus, those who degrade the
climate should pay the social costs associated with their actions.
The tax is therefore justified provided that the compensations are
appropriate (and actually carried out).  As a practical matter,
however, it is virtually impossible to determine how much
individuals are harmed and how much compensation is due.  So, in
practice, emissions taxes are not very attractive from the
standpoint of equity or of efficiency.

Assessments
     The premise of the emissions tax is that individuals are
"entitled" to the status quo -- in this case, a stable environment.
But why should the same right not be granted, instead, to
producers, who have been innocently and legally going about their
business?  If a community wishes to reduce the risk of atmospheric
changes caused by greenhouse gas emissions, should it not
compensate producers for cutting back on their production?
Producers should be willing to cut back if they were paid enough
to cover the costs of reduction, and the community should be
willing to be assessed an amount up to the expected damages.
     How would the costs of reduction be distributed under such an
assessments scheme?  Imagine that the sole source of global warming
is carbon dioxide and that the full costs of reductions are borne
by individuals.  In theory, each individual has a tradeoff rate
between money spent on personal consumption and money spent on
ensuring a stable environment.  In economic terms, the total
payment should be such that the social benefit from any further
reductions is just outweighed by the cost.  At this overall level
of carbon dioxide, all individuals would contribute an amount that
leaves them indifferent between spending one more dollar on
reducing carbon dioxide and spending that dollar on private
consumption or other public goods.
     One obstacle to the realization of the assessments approach
is the free-rider problem.  The contribution of each person toward
reducing greenhouse gases depends on his or her willingness to pay,
that is, the tradeoff rate between spending on greenhouse gas
reduction and other purposes.  If someone says he is not willing
to pay, then he will not be charged.  The free-rider problem also
applies to nations: if a country announces a low willingness to
pay, its citizens will continue to enjoy the reductions being paid
for by everyone else.  Of course, a country facing the prospect of
severe damage (such as Bangladesh, if sea levels rise) might value
reductions highly but be unable to pay.  The way around the problem
is to share costs not according to stated willingness to pay, but
according to some visible proxy, such as economic output -- that
is, ability to pay.
     In the case of global warming, for example, the industrialized
countries might agree to be assessed in proportion to their gross
domestic product.  The funds collected could then be used to
compensate certain producers for cutting back on emissions, as well
as to invest in projects (such as reforestation) that offset global
warming, to develop energy-conserving technologies, and so forth.
Under such an arrangement, the United States would pay about 25
percent of the total, while Denmark would pay 0.5 percent.  Thus
for every dollar that the United States contributed, the fund would
spend $4 on mitigating global warming.  For every dollar that
Denmark contributed, the fund would spend $200.  Because of this
matching effect, it becomes more attractive for everyone to
contribute and the free-rider problem is moderated.
     The obvious difficulty with such a scheme (as with the
revenues from emissions taxes) is that it places large sums of
money in the hands of a bureaucratic agency, which would be charged
with apportioning it among various activities.  In theory the funds
should be allocated so that each additional dollar spent on, say,
reforestation, has the same benefit as each dollar spent on energy
conservation.  But such calculations are difficult to carry out
administratively.  Ultimately, assessments (like emissions taxes)
suffer from the defect of trying to achieve a specific level of
emissions through a command system of prices and subsidies, which
is a notoriously difficult task to carry out efficiently.

Permits and quotas
     The third approach is more direct.  Countries would negotiate
overall target levels of various greenhouse gases and allocate them
in the form of permits or quotas.  The question immediately arises
as to who gets how much and why.
       Most discussions of greenhouse gas reductions assume that
nations are the claimants.  Admittedly, national governments
negotiate the treaties and carry out their terms.  But because it
is individuals who will suffer from dislocations caused by global
warming and who will benefit from a reduction in the risk,
individuals must be the ultimate claimants.  Is each individual
entitled to the same number of permits?  There are two answers to
this question, each one grounded in some conception of justice.
     The "egalitarian" theory holds that everyone is eligible for
exactly the same number of permits.  The 1987 Montreal Ozone
Protocol, for example, allocated chloroflourocarbon emission quotas
equally per capita among the industrialized countries, using
current populations as the basis of the distribution.  A similar
idea has recently been proposed to stabilize carbon emissions.
     The second theory considers current emissions as a claim
established by usage and custom.  This "grandfathering" approach
is observed in many laws and regulations.  For example, when fish
stocks first appeared in danger on the North Atlantic Georges Bank
fishing grounds, the United States and Canada used the 200-mile
Exclusive Economic Zone agreement in the Law of the Sea Treaty to
restrict new entrants, while established boats were allowed to fish
at customary levels.  Such a policy favored traditional fishermen
from New Bedford and Nova Scotia, at the expense of Japanese and
Taiwanese factory-trawler operations.
     If these measures had failed to stabilize fish yields on the
Bank, established claims would probably have been adjusted downward
by comparable amounts.  Similarly, if greenhouse gas emissions must
be cut, it could be argued that all countries should sacrifice
equally, relative to their status quo position, for the common
good.  This "equal sacrifice" doctrine can be variously
interpreted: each country's current rate of emissions might be
reduced by an equal amount per capita, or by a fixed percentage per
capita, or perhaps according to a progressive schedule, with the
greatest percentage cuts being imposed on those with the highest
emissions rates.

Who Gets How Much?
     The practical implications of these two entitlement theories
are radically different (see Table 1).  The industrialized
countries, with less that 25 percent of the population, are
responsible for roughly 60 percent of current carbon dioxide
emissions and 70 percent of cumulative emissions.  If quotas were
distributed equally per capita, the industrialized countries would
initially hold only one-third of the rights that they need to
continue business as usual.  (If past contributions were counted
then they would receive even less; they might even be in debt.)
The less developed countries, by contrast, would hold nearly twice
as many entitlements per capita as they currently need.

               CO2 Emissions
          Cumulative         Current         Population     GNP

Industrial      70 %          60 %           23 %       84%
(GNP > $4,000)

Less Developed  30 %          40 %           77 %       16 %
(GNP < $4,000)

Table 1. Shares of CO2 emissions, population, and GNP for the
industrialized world, 1986.

     Under an egalitarian distribution, the less developed
countries would be willing to sell the industrialized world a large
portion of their current entitlements, though not necessarily their
future ones.  The purchasers would, in theory, be willing to pay
a price as high as the cost of reducing carbon dioxide emissions
at the source.  (There is always the possibility that populous
countries could form a cartel and use their permits to gain
economic and political leverage.  The industrialized countries
would then be faced with the unpleasant choice of accepting the
demands, making drastic cuts in production, or simply reneging on
the agreement.)
     The sums of money involved would be enormous.  If the
objective were to cap emissions of carbon dioxide at current
levels, permits might be worth $25 to $75 per ton, implying a
transfer of up to $200 billion a year from the developed to the
developing world.  (Official OECD development assistance, by
contrast, amounts to about $50 billion.)  Practically speaking,
industrialized countries are unlikely to go along with this
solution, even if it can be justified on grounds of equal
treatment.
     Suppose instead that more weight were given to existing
emissions patterns.  Emissions could be frozen as of some date for
the industrial countries, and the less developed nations would be
permitted to rise to the per capita level enjoyed by the
industrialized world.  But if this rule were followed, emissions
would increase enormously.  Even if population were not growing,
total emissions would eventually triple under this policy.  An
increase of this magnitude poses grave environmental and economic
risk.

A Compromise Proposal
     The practical conclusion is that adhering to the status quo
allows too little flexibility for capping carbon dioxide
production, while an egalitarian distribution takes too little
account of the hardships (and the political realities) that attend
adjustment.  A possible compromise would be to shift, in a series
of steps, from a status quo to an egalitarian regime.  A particular
year could be chosen as the baseline from which adjustments are to
be made.  The goal would be to keep total emissions of each type
of gas below some established ceiling.  A target rate of emissions
per capita could be set for each type of gas.  The entitlements
would then be allotted as follows.  Countries already above the
target rate would have their entitlements reduced a specified
percentage per capita (or a specified amount per capita) over a
series of years.  Countries below the per capita target rate would
be allowed to rise to the target rate.  Emissions entitlements
would be allotted to each nation en bloc, with the internal
distribution of entitlements to be determined by the country's own
policies.  The end result would be an egalitarian regime, but the
phased transition would rest on the idea that everyone should
sacrifice equally in moving toward this regime, except for those
who are already disadvantaged.
     Table 2 gives an idea of how such a scheme would look if it
were put into effect now.  For ten years developing countries'
carbon dioxide emissions would be allowed to grow at 4 percent
(their current rate), while industrial countries' emissions would
be reduced enough to keep worldwide emissions at the base-year
level.  Industrial countries would have to reduce emissions 3.3
percent annually for the first five years and 5 percent annually
for the next five.  Over the ten-year period, total industrial
country emissions would decline 35 percent, while developing
country emissions would rise 48 percent.  In per capita terms, the
industrial countries would cut back 40 percent and the developing
countries expand 21 percent.  On this trajectory, per capita
emissions would eventually equalize, with citizens of developed
countries emitting about half their current amount and citizens of
developing countries about double.

          First year          Fifth year            Tenth year

          Total   Per Cap.    Total   Per Cap.      Total   Per
Cap.
          (109 Tons) Tons  (109 Tons) Tons     (109 Tons) Tons

Industrial     3.88      3.37    3.27   2.72     2.52       2.02

Less           2.86      0.71    3.47   0.78     4.22       0.86
Developed

Table 2. Phased transition from the status quo to an egalitarian
regime, CO2 emissions.


     Should the number of emissions permits be adjusted as
populations continue to grow?  The answer is no -- at least until
the effects of greenhouse emissions on global climate become
clearer.  Permits should be considered an inheritance.  The initial
quotas would be fixed and divided among succeeding generations just
like other forms of property.  The larger the number of
descendants, the smaller share, on average, for each to inherit.
To do otherwise -- for example, to issue more permits as the number
of claimants grows -- would simply dilute the value of emissions
entitlements to everyone else.

Implications for Global Warming Negotiations
     Global warming negotiations are greatly complicated by the
asymmetric positions of the industrialized and the developing
worlds, both in their contribution to the problem and in their
ability to do something about it.  What can be fruitfully
negotiated at this stage and how will equity arguments enter?
     An agreement could be built up around several points.  The
first step would be to identify various patterns of emissions that
participating countries believe to carry an unacceptable level of
risk.  From this one would formulate a set of overall ceilings on
emissions that would apply over the next several decades.  These
ceilings could then be adjusted as better scientific information
becomes available.  It should be openly acknowledged that the
ceilings may not represent the economically efficient level of
emissions.  We simply do not know enough to carry out the necessary
cost-benefit analysis.  Even if we did, we would not automatically
know what decision to make, because the decision ultimately hangs
on the community's willingness to accept risk, and this is a matter
of judgment.
     The second step would be to identify the general means through
which the burden of adjustment would be allocated.  Of the three
choices -- taxes, country assessments, and quotas -- the first two
attempt to achieve a physical target through fiscal policy, which
is extremely difficult.  The amount of money raised in both cases
would be enormous -- several hundred billion dollars.  It is
doubtful that such sums could be spent wisely and effectively.
That leaves quotas.  They achieve quantity goals directly without
requiring a central taxing authority, and they can be adjusted over
time.  Though it is complicated by competing theories of the proper
basis for allocation, the compromise we have outlined between the
egalitarian and the status quo positions could be appealing to both
developed and developing countries.
     Once the initial allocation is made, should trade in permits
be allowed?  Although there are theoretical arguments in favor of
such a policy, it does not seem practical any time soon.  One
difficulty is that the issuance of entitlements is necessarily
tentative: if global warming turns out to be worse than expected,
the permits may have to be taken away.  If it turns out to be
milder than expected, more permits could be issued.  In either
case, these uncertainties effectively dilute the value of the
permits.  A second difficulty is that there is no way to enforce
the quotas.  Until everyone sees that emissions in excess of permit
holdings will not be allowed, it makes little sense to pay anything
for a permit.  In the international arena, monitoring and enforcing
compliance are far more difficult than they are in domestic policy.
Building confidence in an enforcement mechanism will take time,
perhaps decades.
     Fortunately, tradable permits offer a suitable method for
distributing a country's emission quota within its own borders.
The sulfur dioxide permit system in the 1990 U.S. Clear Air Act
amendments provides a clear case in point.  Successful domestic
experience could shorten the time needed for effective
international application.
     There is yet a third problem with an international permits
market.  The argument for temporarily granting higher per capita
emissions rates to the industrialized countries is that an
egalitarian distribution would work too great a hardship on them.
If permits were freely tradable, however, then sales by these
"heavy emitters" would suggest that they had been treated too
generously and that the initial allocation was unfair.
     The phased transition plan proposed above represents a
compromise between a radical insistence on absolute equality and
a conservative commitment to the status quo.  Yet it virtually
ignores the historical contributions of the industrialized world
to the present build-up of greenhouse gases.  How should these past
emissions be counted in distributing the present costs of
adjustment?  Estimating past emissions with any degree of accuracy
is extremely difficult.  Furthermore, any attempt to pin down past
responsibility must also factor in the benefits that resulted from
the laissez-faire regime.  For example, oil-producing countries
have surely benefitted over the past half-century from the
unchecked emissions of carbon dioxide.  The accumulated benefits
(and blame) are so widely diffused that the true extent of each
country's liability is probably impossible to estimate.  A better
solution, for which there is precedent in the 1987 Montreal
Protocol, would be for the industrialized countries to establish
a joint fund that would invest in research and technology transfer
and provide financial aid to help the developing countries adjust
to the new regime.
     Even relatively modest levels of investment could have
substantial benefits.  For example, the fund could support the
development of improved global climate models, as well as basic
research on chemical and biological processes related to global
warming.  It might also award prizes for promising inventions and
discoveries that could help remedy the global warming problem.  At
a more ambitious level, the fund could provide credits to
developing countries that adopt various technologies expected to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions.   A reasonable basis for sharing
the costs of such a fund would be a commonly accepted measure of
ability to pay, such as gross domestic product, or the United
Nations contributions scale.  By any such formula, the burden of
costs would fall squarely on the developed countries.  Not only
would this be widely regarded as fair, it could prove to be of
strategic and symbolic value in generating an agreement.  The
developed world would make a visible commitment, not only to
cutting back on its own emissions, but also to helping the
developing countries deal with a problem that the industrialized
countries are largely responsible for setting in motion.

The Role of Equity in an Agreement
     Admittedly, the solution that we have proposed is not terribly
tidy.  It relies on a mix of approaches: the status quo is taken
as the legitimate starting point from which progress could be made
toward a more egalitarian distribution of resources.  Reaching it
will involve a combination of policy instruments -- initial
restrictions on emissions with voluntary compliance, followed later
by the evolution of a market in permits and stricter enforcement
mechanisms, with financial help along the way provided to the
developing world by the developed one.
     The objective, however, is not neat solutions, but equitable
ones.  Equity is a complicated, nuanced business that cannot be
reduced to simple recipes like grandfathering present emissions or
handing out equal numbers of permits to everyone.  Equity involves
balancing various considerations -- past responsibility, present
practice, ability to pay, and need.  Delegates at climate change
talks -- those in process now, those in Rio in June, and those
beyond -- must craft a solution that treats everyone fairly subject
to their disparate circumstances.
     Naturally, the negotiators emphasize the justice of solutions
that tilt in their favor.  But schemes that are too obviously self-
serving have little power to persuade others.  The proposals that
have the greatest chance of success are those that strike a balance
between competing claims.  As Judge Learned Hand once put it:
"justice is the tolerable accommodation of the conflicting
interests of society."  In this sense, equity is not some utopian
ideal dreamed up by philosophers; it is the tool that practical
negotiators use to forge consensus.
     Unless the delegates can accommodate the diverse positions of
the developed and developing world within a framework perceived to
be fair, the talks will degenerate into a mere contest of wills
that comes to naught.  Given the prospect -- even the improbable
prospect -- of calamitous changes in climate, the stakes are too
high to risk a failure of this magnitude.

</PRE>

</BODY>

</html>
</DOC>