
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B20-48</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA005-000051-B017-387</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://lacebark.ntu.edu.au:80/j_mitroy/sid101/gh1/ghblues.html 138.80.61.12 19970221151725 text/html 56103
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 21 Feb 1997 14:47:38 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.3
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 55931
Last-modified: Tue, 09 Jul 1996 02:25:43 GMT
</DOCHDR>



<html>

<TITLE>The Greenhouse Blues</TITLE>

<PRE>


               GREENHOUSE BLUES


               "A permanent modern scenario: apocalypse looms,
               and it doesn't occur... Apocalypse has become an
               event that is happening, and not happening.  It
               may be that some of the most feared events, like
               those involving the irreparable ruin of the
               environment, have already happened.  But we don't
               know it yet, because the standards have changed. 
               Or because we do not have the right indexes for
               measuring the catastrophe.  Or simply because this
               is a catastrophe in slow motion.  
               
                                   -- Susan Sontag [1]


     The 1990 edition of the Worldwatch Institute's annual State of
the World [2] claims we have about 40 years to establish a sustainable
economy -- or be engulfed in a self-perpetuating spiral of ecological
and economic decline.  It's an odd, precise figure, the sort usually
discounted as a product of apocalyptic excess.  These days, though, it
seems to warrant extra consideration.  For one thing, the elements of
the projected catastrophe -- from pollution, extinction, and
population growth to deforestation and the ecological costs of energy
production -- have become depressingly familiar.  For another, the
power, inertia, and sheer dilapidation of the global economy have
begun to sink in, as have the depth and power of institutionalized
militarism.

     Twenty years after the first Earth Day, we are then perhaps only
40 years from the abyss.  If the greenhouse theorists are right -- and
the bulk of the evidence suggests that they are -- local ecological
crises must be seen in the light of, and indeed as elements of, the
even more threatening catastrophe of climatic destabilization.  This
aggregation offers the perverse satisfaction of rendering equivocation
and half-measures absurd, but it may also set the stage for a tragic
denouement that has been centuries in the making.

     Death, to misquote Samuel Johnson, concentrates the mind
wonderfully, and it's for just this reason that global warming makes
so potent a subject of reflection.  The frames within which it is
presented reveal, with rare clarity, the presumptions and prejudices
of the framers.  This is true in the media battle between those who
emphasize the near-consensus among scientists on the warming and those
whose stories abet equivocation and business-as-usual.  And it's true
in the environmental movement, where the warming, though unproven, is
taken dead seriously, and the debate centers on its political and
cultural significance.

THE SCOPE OF THE THREAT
     The major consequences of a rapid greenhouse warming have been
envisioned in detail: dying reefs, withering forests, seas of refugees
(many of them leaving the United States), extinction, drought, and
crushingly violent storms.  Still, and despite the clarity of such
foresight, uncertain and prospective events are difficult to force
onto the policy agenda -- especially in the United States, where much
of the ruling elite regards the costs of prevention as a threat more
dire than the warming itself.    

     The bulk of the greenhouse warming is caused by carbon dioxide
(CO2), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and methane, gases which have been
called "nontraditional" pollutants because they take their toll not by
despoiling isolated regions but by accumulating globally and
destabilizing the biosphere as a whole.  CO2, which because of its
sheer abundance is the most damaging of the greenhouse gases, is an
unavoidable product of fossil-fuel consumption -- and the cheap, easy
energy available from fossil fuels has played a major and largely
unappreciated role in the history of industrial capitalism.  Now, it
seems imperative to drastically reduce the use not only of methane and
CFCs, but of the fossil-fuels as well, even though this reduction
implies a radical break with the energy economy that has underlain
capitalism from its very earliest days.  As the Gulf War has once
again shown, this break will not come easily.

     There is -- and this is crucial -- much that can be done, though
not an indefinite time to do it in.  This is clear from the gap
between "bad case" and "good case" scenarios, both supplied by the
World Resources Institute [3].  In the bad case, no substantive effort
is made to slow C02 emissions, increase energy efficiency, or speed
solar development, although CFC production and use is brought in line
with the Montreal Protocol.  The outcome?  By 2020, an average global
temperature of from 1.8 to 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit greater than it was
a century ago, and by 2075 a rise of 5.8 to 17.5 degrees!  If coal use
increases as well -- a real possibility, particularly in China -- the
warming could soon reach a truly staggering magnitude.  (Even this
isn't the worst case scenario, since there's a possibility of a "super
greenhouse effect" set off by a relatively small warming and a series
of "positive feedbacks" on it.  Melting permafrost ice, for example,
could release massive amounts of methane, an extremely powerful
greenhouse gas.)

     In the "good case" scenarios, such as they are, strong global
efforts to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions allow the atmosphere to
stabilize.  Oil, gas, and coal prices are sharply increased, per
capita energy use declines in industrialized countries, and support
for solar development is radically increased.  Tropical countries not
only stop decimating their rain forests but begin large-scale
reforestation efforts.  And so on.  The World Resources Institute
model indicates that, even if all these heroic efforts had begun in
1988, there would still be a warming of 3 to 7 degrees Fahrenheit by
2075, when the temperature would level off.  Such a temperature
increase, over such a short period of time, is unprecedented in human
history, and could well be large enough to cause massive ecological
and social disruptions.  According to the First Assessment Report [4]
of the scientific committee of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), the U.N. agency chartered with the task of coordinating
global warming policy, the "state of scientific knowledge" indicates
that such a "stabilization" is the best that can be expected, and
would require "an immediate reduction in global man-made [CO2] emis-
sions by 60 to 80%."  

     So, if greenhouse theory is valid, the whole global economy must
be restructured, fundamentally and soon.  The longer marketeers push
their phony optimism, the longer politicians dispute, equivocate, and
lie, the longer technicians strain for faith in the viability of half
measures, the worse the odds will get.  Not that these are the last
days -- humans are adaptable and will likely survive (which is more
than can be said for lots of other species).  But each moment wasted
is another step along a path to an ugly and inauspicious future.

     As the predictions of greenhouse theory have become familiar,
they -- like ecology in general -- have emerged as key social metrics.
We now know, for example, that ours is not a "sustainable" society,
and as the ecological crisis worsens this charge becomes damning in a
manner that somehow exceeds all prior accusations.  It's no wonder,
then, that ecological and climactic science are clotted with politics,
or that the media frames imposed on greenhouse theory often emphasize
"uncertainty," cost, and the putative dangers of "over-reaction."  The
issues here are difficult, for science resists reduction to ideology,
even as it can offer ideology its firmest ground.  Witness the
influence of John Sununu, architect of U.S. greenhouse policy and
probably the first high U.S. official to hold a PhD in fluid dynamics,
a PhD he uses to disguise a corrupt and technocratic optimism as
legitimate scientific skepticism.

     The outlines of at least the immediate future are clear.  The
Bush Administration has distinguished itself by the vehemence of its
opposition to meaningful anti-greenhouse policies, while every other
wealthy industrial country has taken at least tentative steps toward
stabilizing or reducing CO2 emissions by the year 2000.  Germany, New
Zealand, Denmark, and Australia have committed themselves to emission
reductions of at least 20 percent by 2005, and though this is cause
for hope, global negotiations have been all but paralyzed by the U.S.
delegation. (The first U.N. session, held February 1991 in Chantilly
Virginia, was spent, by U.S. insistence, on procedural matters.  All
substantive proposals were deferred.)  Meanwhile, in the Third World,
particularly India and China, efforts to engage the greenhouse issue
have been caught up in charges of "environmental colonialism."  And in
the old Soviet bloc, particularly the Soviet Union itself, rapid
progress does not appear likely.  All in all, it's fair to say that
the politics of the greenhouse are inseparable from the politics of
the larger world system -- which suffers its fossil-fuel dependency as
only one element in a rich variety of debilitating legacies.

ENVIRONMENTAL OPTIMISM, ECOLOGICAL DESPAIR
     The most compelling of the new greenhouse books are probably
Stephen Schneider's Global Warming: Are We Entering the Greenhouse
Century?, Michael Oppenheimer and Robert Boyle's Dead Heat: The Race
Against the Greenhouse Effect and Bill McKibben's The End of Nature
[5].  Taken together, they form a grim syllabus, not only about global
warming but also about the depth of the environmental movement's break
with systemic political analysis.  Each chooses, in its own manner and
for its own reasons, to present the erosion of climatic stability by
the fossil-fuel economy -- coal and oil! -- with barely a nod to the
political, economic, or ideological dynamics of the society within
which it developed.

     Stephen Schneider, head of Interdisciplinary Climate Systems at
the National Center for Atmospheric Research, is among the most famous
of the greenhouse scientists, and serves well to reveal the contours
of mainstream environmentalism.  Schneider cuts an interesting figure
-- the liberal public scientist as statesman of the greenhouse age. 
His world is big science and big government, and though he spends a
good deal of time debating Reaganesque bureaucrats and politicians, he
doesn't allow himself to lose hope.  Trained in the habits of
rationalism, he sees an emergency and thinks the need for a
cooperative global response will soon be undeniable.  He is a
pragmatist, as he believes the times require.

     In Scientific American's special "Managing Planet Earth" issue,
Schneider argued that conversion to a post-greenhouse economy would
cost "hundreds of billions of dollars every year for many decades,
both at home and in financial and technical assistance to developing
nations," yet he was confident that this was a realistic possibility. 
Anticipating a pessimistic reading, he argued that pessimism was too
easy, that not long ago "a massive disengagement of NATO and Warsaw
Pact forces in Europe also seemed inconceivable." [6]  And so it did,
to many.  But today, with the flush of post-Cold War euphoria long
past, the case for pessimism is again obvious.  It is well known that
world military expenditures, at almost a trillion dollars per year,
could feed and educate the entire human race.  They could also build a
post-greenhouse economy.  The question is whether they'll ever be
spent doing so.  

     Optimism can be dangerous.  When the Worldwatch Institute's ten-
hour series, The Race to Save the Planet -- which took five years and
$7 million to produce -- was recently broadcast in the San Francisco
Bay Area, one local critic remarked that it devoted so much time to
upbeat segments (designed, presumably, to avoid spreading doom and
gloom) that it left the impression that the situation wasn't that grim
after all.  The producers had stumbled in the great, precarious tug-
of-war of ecologic politics, which, despite widespread grassroots
activism and an increasingly coherent analysis, is torn between
despair on the one side and liberal optimism on the other.  

     Here's an extreme dose of inspirational liberal optimism, from
Dead Heat, written by Michael Oppenheimer, a senior scientist at the
Environmental Defense Fund, and Robert Boyle.  This text was reprinted
(as "Techno-Hope") in the 1990 Earth Day issue of Mother Jones:

     The change began in 1992 when the nations of the world, under the
     guidance of the United Nations Environmental Program, signed an
     agreement to limit greenhouse gases.  Cynics scoffed at a
     "toothless" accord, but they failed to notice the underlying
     currents.  Battered by foreign economic invasion and constrained
     by a limited budget, the United States canceled the Super
     Collider, the Space Station, and Star Wars and diverted billions
     to research and education.  By the mid-1990s, it had concluded a
     series of treaties with the Soviet Union, which led gradually to
     a mutual reduction of forces.  But the expected blow to the
     defense contractors never materialized because the government
     poured some of the billions of dollars saved into procurement of
     solar energy sources, and several large companies quickly
     converted to renewable-energy development.  The trend accelerated
     when the Great Drought of the late nineties struck and industry
     began the total phaseout of fossil fuels.  Now rich nations
     compete to supply smaller countries with solar cells rather than
     weapons.

     
     One must ask the purpose of such prose.  Should it be excused as
bad exhortatory fiction, or is it true to the dreams of Washington
environmentalists?  If this the hope they can imagine, it's no wonder
that "radical environmentalism," as it has emerged in the last decade,
has chosen pessimism.  

     Examples of radical pessimism are easy to come by, but Bill
McKibben's The End of Nature is distinguished by its vivid evocation
of greenhouse crisis and by its relentless despair.  McKibben is an
apostle of deep-ecological radicalism.  Not being a scientist, he need
not posture at objectivity -- yet neither does he accept political and
economic views.  To even name this society as "capitalist" and insist
that the distinctions made thereby are significant strikes him as
absurd.  The warming is only the last in a long series of attacks on
the environment, and politics too small a thing to place against the
end of wilderness.  We can and should resist -- with direct action, by
consuming less, wearing sweaters around the house, not having children
-- but it won't be enough, not really.  Soon we'll find ourselves
almost alone, with only the plants and animals we've chosen to save,
on a desiccated and lonely world.

     It's a view so tragic as to be almost absurd, were it not for its
desire to face the whole grim truth.  With the U.S. Administration
bent on resisting any real greenhouse treaty, there's a strong
temptation to see the measures being taken elsewhere -- like Germany's
commitment to a 25 percent cut in CO2 production by the year 2005 --
as substantial alternatives.  But are they?  The Third World is now
well along on the road of fossil-fuel industrialism -- will the
Europeans pay to help it go solar instead?  In the next 40 years? 
McKibben knows of the calls for massive military cuts and a crash
campaign of conversion to a post-greenhouse economy; he just doesn't
think it's going to happen.

"UNCERTAINTY" AS IDEOLOGY
     In February 1990, when President Bush addressed the UN's climatic
change panel, many environmentalists were bitterly disappointed.  They
had allowed campaign rhetoric about a "White House effect" to seduce
them into hope for emergency initiatives, and now Bush, instead of
giving voice to any spirit of emergency, had insisted that greenhouse
policy "be consistent with economic growth and free-market
principles." [7]
          
     Just days before Bush delivered his speech, revisions had
transformed it from one that emphasized the seriousness of global
warming to one that emphasized scientific uncertainties and made no
recommendations for action.  In the preceding months, the media had
taken the same turn, buzzing with reports that scientists (except for
a few greenhouse radicals) in fact doubted the warming predictions. 
On December 13, 1989, for example, The New York Times ran a cover
feature on the "greenhouse skeptics," and Forbes -- which subsequently
began advertising itself as "The magazine that's not afraid to take a
little heat" -- ran an expose on "The Global Warming Panic" (in its
1989 Christmas issue.) 

     The backstage maneuvering had been going on for some time, with
both greenhouse theorists and skeptics pressing their arguments in
Washington as the time for Bush's speech approached.  In September
1989, for example, Richard S. Lindzen of M.I.T and Jerome Namais of
the Scripps Institute of Oceanography wrote the White House, arguing
that current global warming forecasts "are so inaccurate and fraught
with uncertainty as to be useless to policy makers."  Sununu and Bush,
according to press reports, "welcomed the input." [8]

     Lindzen and Namais are both noted meteorologists and members of
the National Academy of Sciences.  Lindzen, who is perhaps the leader
of the anti-greenhouse scientists, has made major contributions to
atmospheric theory.  Their views carry weight.  Yet Lindzen's theories
are, by his own words, of a "theological or philosophical" nature [9],
and reduce to a faith in the existence of atmospheric dynamics, yet
undiscovered, of sufficient magnitude to counter the known effects of
the greenhouse gases.  That such faith can be used to justify U.S.
intransigence in U.N. greenhouse negotiations indicates how strong the
political currents running below the surface of "objective" science
can be.  More specifically, it demonstrates the ideological uses, not
only here but in a variety of debates over cancer and toxicity, of the
"uncertainty" of scientific data.  (Incidentally, one of Lindzen's
chief claims -- that water vapor may diminish rather than amplify
global warming -- was refuted by research published only a month after
Bush's speech. [10])

     Uncertainty plays such a key role in scientifically loaded policy
debates because it converts the question "What is to be done?" into
"Should anything be done at all?"  Witness Warren Brookes' Forbes
article, which asks whether greenhouse warming is "the 1990s version
of earlier scares: nuclear winter, cancer-causing cranberries and $100
oil?" and goes on to assert that "just as Marxism is giving way to
markets, the political `greens' seem determined to put the world
economy back into the red, using the greenhouse effect to stop
unfettered market-based expansion." [11]  Further, Brookes says, even
though "60% of the public is convinced [global warming] will worsen,"
in reality "the evidence of that alleged trend is under increasingly
sharp and solid attack."

     Is it indeed?  This claim, common in the popular press, directly
contradicts the scientific consensus and the conclusions of the U.N.
IPCC's scientific committee.  (The United States has its greatest veto
power in the policy committee).  Yet because climatic dynamics are
both complex and poorly understood, uncertainty can always be made to
seem plausible simply by citing data selectively.  Brookes, for
example, is careful to focus on U.S. statistics, rather than the
global statistics that would contradict his chosen view.

     All scientists acknowledge uncertainties in the atmospheric
models.  The real debate turns on the meaning of that uncertainty, and
its ideological uses.  These uses are both conscious and deliberate,
as demonstrated by a White House memo to the American IPCC delegation,
which was leaked to the press in April 1990.  The memo's list of
"debates to avoid" included whether "there is or is not" global
warming and how much warming could be expected.  "In the eyes of the
public," it went on, "we will lose this debate.  A better approach is
to raise the many uncertainties that need to be understood on this
issue." [12]

     "Uncertainty" has a different meaning in the laboratory than in
the White House press room.  Though scientists argue over the details,
the scientific community accepts the thrust of greenhouse theory for 
the simple reason that it dovetails with routine laboratory physics. 
Carbon dioxide, methane and the CFCs do trap heat; that's why they're
called greenhouse gases.  The rising atmospheric concentrations of
these gases are not in dispute; nor is the geological record, which
indicates that increases in CO2 correlate with increased temperatures. 
And though the earth's metabolism incorporates many buffers -- ice
sheets, forests, oceans, clouds -- there's no scientific reason to
believe that these buffers will neutralize the vast seas of CO2 that
will be spewed into the air in the coming century.  

     The summer of 1988, with its wilting heat wave and corresponding
spike of greenhouse fear, was ages ago in ideological time.  (Though
globally 1990 was the hottest year on the recent record books.)  The
anti-greenhouse counter-revolution began in 1989, and today, as oil,
recession, and militarism push hope, ecology and Eastern Europe off
the front page, it's wise to brace for a wave of denial and lies. 
Even before the Gulf War, with ecology still in the media foreground,
the greenhouse debate had begun to thicken with equivocation.  Now,
stonewalling is official U.S. policy.  

     The near future of the debate is reasonably predictable.  It is
only necessary to project current trends, and to review the history of
another atmospheric crisis -- the destruction of the ozone layer by
chlorinated chemicals.  Here, too, laboratory science predicted the
threat.  Here, too, the difficulty of proving atmospheric damage made
it possible for interested powers to frame a scientific near-consensus
as controversy -- even though it was already clear in 1973 that CFCs
damaged the ozone layer.  Only the discovery of the Antarctic ozone
hole finally turned the tide.  (If indeed it has been turned at all. 
The 1990 revision to the Montreal Protocol allows half again the CFCs
produced in the past 50 years to be produced in the next ten! [13])

     Sherwood Rowland, the scientist whose lab discovered the ozone-
shredding properties of CFCs, once commented "It is quite common on
the scientific side of industry to believe that there aren't any real
environmental problems, that there are just public relations
problems." [14]  It's an astute remark.  Public relations, not
physics, is the paradigm science of the modern age, and it's difficult
to imagine it counting for more than it does today, when 76 percent of
the American people describe themselves as environmentalists. 

     Why, finally, is prudence so difficult, even in the face of a
more-than-plausible catastrophe?  There are many answers, but rising
above the fog is the insistence that the economy be left unfettered
unless it can be "proved" that the ecological costs of inaction are
absolutely intolerable.  Meanwhile, 1990 was the hottest year to date,
the year that dying coral reefs (global warming is the chief suspect)
became big news, and the fourth straight record year for coal
production.

FOSSIL-FUEL DEPENDENCY
     The fossil-fuel economy is expensive, very expensive.  In the
United States, subsidies to the automobile alone are about as large as
the military budget -- amounting to $2,200 per car per year, or $400
billion a year! [15]  (The U.S. truck and auto fleet now exceeds 180
million vehicles, up from 108 million in 1970.  That's one for every
1.7 Americans, up from one for every 2.4 per in 1970).  In fact, the
real auto subsidy is much larger: although the $400 billion figure
includes highway and road construction and repair, as well as other
direct support services like police protection and paramedical aid, it
does not include indirect costs like the estimated $47 billion the
United States has annually spent patrolling the Persian Gulf -- a
figure that has recently been substantially increased.  And then there
are the billions that go to Big Oil each year as tax shelters and
depletion allowances, the health costs associated with the burning of
fossil fuels, and the costs of the strategic petroleum reserve and
oil-spill cleanups.  The cost of this last item alone vastly exceeds
the entire solar-energy budget.  As for the ultimate costs of oil and
coal dependence, these defy calculation.

     The fossil fuels benefit from fantastic, almost unaccountable
subsidies -- paid in dependence, demoralization, and catastrophe, as
well as in cash.  In the 1970s, it seemed that a scarcity of oil might
force a transition to a new energy economy, but in the last few years
more fossil fuel has been discovered than has been extracted from the
ground.  This trend leaves state regulation standing alone, without
increased energy prices to buttress environmental policies -- a
situation that will likely remain for the indefinite future.  Just
before the war OPEC held a meeting that focused on Western European
moves to reduce pollution by curbing the use of oil.  Calling this "a
serious challenge," a Saudi official said that OPEC economists would
study the environmental concerns of Western Europe and the effects
they might have on the use of oil. [16]  Now, after the war, price
stability -- at a level advantageous to the winners -- is the order of
the day, and there's little chance that the cost of oil will go high
enough to force a real energy transition.

     The New York Times Magazine recently claimed that "many people,
throughout the world, believe that the implications -- scientific,
economic, medical, social, technological and political -- of LA's
environmental confrontation foreshadow the showdown awaiting the
entire world." [17]  It's a plausible claim.  If even Los Angeles, one
of the world's richest cities, can't control its air pollution, can
there be any hope in the larger global "showdown"?  At issue, of
course, is the auto-industrial economy, or rather, the car.  Cars mean
individual freedom, and given the social and physical structure of the
modern world, and especially of its cities, it's not hard to see why. 
Roads jam and commutes grow ever longer, but instead of real mass
transit (which is hard to build for the low-density cities of the
automobile age) we get "auto environments" -- quieter cars, CD
stereos, recorded novels, cellular phones, and even microwave ovens.  

     Even technical fixes, long scorned by eco-radicals as means of
avoiding substantive changes, are considered threats -- to the point
where it's hard to imagine a technology as revolutionary as, say,
insulation, being used to anything approaching its potential.  In late
1988 a mild EPA report on greenhouse policy became instantly
controversial, recommending as it did auto efficiency standards of 40
miles per gallon, plantation-grown wood as a fossil-fuel substitute,
and the aggressive pursuit of solar power.  Such initiatives pose no
threat to capitalism, at least not in the abstract, though they seem
to threaten this particular capitalism, with all its ties -- in
history, ideology and infrastructure -- to cheap fossil fuels.  

     If there is to be a conversion to a post-greenhouse economy, the
power of the fossil-fuel sector must be broken.  This, obviously, is a
tall order, for we inhabit a world in which "cheap" fossil fuels face
us on every side, objectified as cities, factories, ruling elites.  It
will take work to get out of here, and luck, and planning.  But, at
least in the United States, free-market ideology is so strong, and
planning held in such ill esteem, that even government research and
development funds for computer and networking technologies are
threatened.  One need be no friend of the high-tech path to see that,
if the dogmatic allure of minimal government can endanger developments
such as these, solar power and light rail are far from any
renaissance.

PREVENTION VERSUS ADAPTATION
     In the greenhouse literature, conversion strategies aimed at
reducing the production of greenhouse gases (i.e. carbon taxes aimed
to phase out fossil-fuels) go by the name of "prevention," while
muddling along as the climate changes (i.e. building dikes against
rising seas) is known as "adaptation."  Environmentalists support
prevention, while mainstream economists, following their own failing
god, usually advocate "freeing" the market to reshape society (and
nature) to the new climate.  Usually, the debate is restrained, and
the likely specifics of adaptation -- political chaos, for example, or
ferocious storms -- disappear in a cloud of genteel generalization. 
And though everyone knows that some adaptation will be inevitable,
environmentalists don't like to admit it, justifiably fearing that
such an admission will help force prevention from the agenda.  It's
easier, after all, to breed drought-resistant crops (the Israelis are
already doing so) than to convert to a sustainable economy; easier to
insure against a possible rise in sea level by raising the height of
offshore drilling platforms (Shell Oil is already doing so) than to
reduce oil consumption.

     Stephen Schneider has weighed into the prevention-vs-adaptation
debate with the notion of "active adaptation," in which preventive
measures are used to slow the warming and a planned post-greenhouse
infrastructure is phased in as the existing infrastructure wears out. 
It's a fine idea, if a bit abstract, and he tries to make it practical
as well by arguing that the adaptations necessary to stabilize the
atmosphere -- conservation, reforestation, and all the rest -- would
be economically beneficial in themselves, regardless of any threat of
global warming.

     The U.S. economics establishment, for its part, is wasting no
time in combatting moves to make prevention strategies appear
reasonable.  The New York Times, in a front-page story by economics
writer Peter Passell, entitled "Cure for Greenhouse Effect: The Costs
Will Be Staggering," [18] sketched the drift of official opinion. 
"Crude initial estimates," Passell opines, indicate that for at least
the next 50 years it will be cheaper to adapt to greenhouse warming
than to attack its causes.  He then presents a number of economists,
all regally unconcerned by the "externalities" ignored by their models
-- storms, starvation, extinction -- and suffering little strain
extending their traditional views to emerging conditions.  Harvard's
Thomas Shelling argues that increasing costs for irrigation and flood
control will raise the price of food by only 20 percent, that the
quality of life 100 years from now will depend as much on technology
and capital as on the amount of CO2 in the air, and that "if money to
contain carbon dioxide emissions comes out of other investment, future
civilizations could be the losers."  In another article, Passell is
even more sanguine.  Citing Department of Agriculture estimates that a
doubling of atmospheric CO2 would cost $170 billion annually in
reduced agricultural productivity, he concluded, "That's a lot of
money.  But it amounts to just 1 percent of current world income.  As
[Bush's Council of Economic Advisors] argues, it is in the same
ballpark as the costs of government regulations that now distort food
production and reduce its total value.  To put it another way, freer
markets in agriculture, the Council suggests, could more than offset
greenhouse-effect losses." [19]

     There are more examples, equally appalling.  The anti-prevention
economists tend to the political right, and generally see the economy
as conforming to some idealized notion of free-market efficiency.  In
reality, the economy is anything but efficient, as is shown by the
work of physicist and alternative energy analyst Amory Lovins.

A "LEAST COST" ENERGY ECONOMY?
     Lovins, best known for his Soft Energy Paths [20], takes a
position so far from the traditional standard that it's hard to
believe he's describing the same world.  While many economists argue
that conversion to a post-greenhouse world is unaffordable, especially
in the Third World, Lovins insists that it would be far cheaper to cut
greenhouse gas emissions by increasing energy efficiency than to
continue along the present path.  Further, he sees energy efficiency
as a prerequisite for sustainable development, and believes that "far
from being costly, abating global warming should, on the whole, be
immensely profitable.  Improving energy productivity can save the
world upwards of a trillion dollars per year -- as much as the global
military budget."  

     Lovins isn't crazy.  He's simply worked out the "inefficiencies"
in world energy markets, in detail, and concluded that the world can
be saved by being rationally frugal.  Talking about a 1981 book, Least
Cost Energy: Solving the CO2 Problem, which he coauthored, Lovins
says,  "We began by documenting the potential to save about three-
fourths of the energy used in 1973 to run the West German economy...
We then imagined, a century hence, an entire world industrialized to
that level: a world of eight billion people, with a fivefold gross
increase in the World Product and a tenfold increase in developing
countries' economic activity.  Yet if, in such a world, energy were
used in ways that saved money with 1980 prices and technologies, total
energy use would fall to a third of today's level... Of course, a
world with eight billion people industrialized to a West German
standard may be unrealistic or undesirable for other reasons.  Our
point was that an energy policy built on efficiency would enable the
Earth to support a prosperous civilization that was not plagued by
acid rain, global warming, urban smog, nuclear proliferation and
deforestation." [21]

     And what of Lovins' view that the market makes a good vehicle for
such discipline?  It makes his work interesting in two respects. 
First, by showing just how far today's economy diverges from one based
on "least cost" energy, he proves the ideological nature of analyses
that treat the existing economy as the product of "efficient" market
forces.  Second, his faith in the market prompts a key question: Why,
after all, is our present society so monumentally inefficient?  Is it,
as Lovins believes, because powerful institutional forces prevent the
market from imposing economic discipline?  Or is it, as green radicals
have long claimed, the very success of the market -- in particular its
success in "externalizing" social and ecological costs -- that is to
blame?  

     Certainly the captains of industry skip out on the bill whenever
they can, but this doesn't prove the market compels them to do so, for
today's economy is structured as much by militarism and state subsidy
as by direct market force.  What part, then, does the market play?  Is
this even an important question, or is it enough to know that
countries and corporations alike find profit and comparative advantage
in wasted energy?  If some new energy policy could change the rules of
the game, making it more profitable to pursue a solar transition than
to continue along the present disastrous path, would that policy stand
a chance of being implemented?  Lovins believes that it would, and
perhaps he's right.  But is such an energy policy possible, given the
degree to which the rich and powerful have bound their interests to
the fossil fuels?  Is it possible soon enough?

THE POLITICS OF EMERGENCY
     Like ecological crisis in general, the greenhouse crisis compels
us to ask, first of all, what will work.  Unfortunately, this isn't a
simple question, even in the best of cases -- and judging by the rush
to parlay the greenhouse crisis into a rebirth for nuclear power, it
doesn't appear that much rational, clear-headed pragmatism will come
of this emergency.  Just how much room remains for cheap maneuvering
is clear from the wave of articles we've suffered in the last few
years on a "new generation" of "passively safe" reactors.  The anti-
nuclear battle, it seems, will have to be fought once again, and this
time the battle lines will not be clearly drawn.  Senator Wirth caught
the spin of greenhouse nuclear boosterism just right when he argued, a
few years back, that it's time for the country to get over the
"nuclear measles."  "The environmentalists will come around," he
added.  "They can't help but come around." [22]

     And some environmentalists have come around.  William Reilly,
director of the Environmental Protection Agency, is one of them, and
so is Schneider, who finds himself compelled to advocate "inherently
safe" nukes -- in a book published by the Sierra Club! [23]  Thus,
environmentalists take up the spirit of emergency, but sometimes only
deepen the fogs of false necessity that obscure the real choices. 
Lovins, with his insistence on simple economics, is rather clearer,
noting that "investing in nuclear power rather than in far cheaper
energy-efficient technologies will make global warming worse." [24] 
It's a point that alone justifies the end of the nuclear industry.  It
also shows how, amidst apocalyptic storms, the "least cost" argument
can be a welcome tonic -- the more you spend on nukes, the less you
have for fluorescent bulbs, weatherstripping, solar research and mass
transit.  

     It's from the strength of such simple economics, ultimately, that
"Third Wave Environmentalism" draws its charms.  The Third Wavers,
from the Worldwatch Institute to the Environmental Defense Fund to the
EPA, seek to yoke the market to the goal of ecological reform -- and
to avoid stickier political issues -- by arguing that the best hope
lies in modulating existing markets with new taxes (like carbon taxes)
and in creating new markets in abstract goods like tradable "pollution
rights."  With such markets in place, both companies and countries
could profit by controlling pollution, for any unused space in their
pollution allocations could be sold to the highest bidder.  The goal
of such devices is to "internalize" ecological costs into the economic
calculus, and to thereby avoid the absurdities that occur when
bureaucracies attempt to micromanage economies.  In other words, Third
Wavers want to use the market to force the larger economy to adapt to
natural limits.

     The historical background here is crucial -- traditional
pollution-control measures have failed, and just about everyone admits
it.  Further, in the wake of the Eastern Bloc catastrophe, state-
centered "planning" is held in poor repute indeed.  The Third Wavers,
without faith in democratic forms of planning (if they have even heard
of them) see the market as the sole alternative to bureaucratic
command-and-control.  These days, there are even radical Third-Wavers, 
dreaming of markets that, though still capitalist, have become both
ecologically efficient and democratically accountable. [25]  It's a
desperate dream, to be sure, for it relegates popular opposition to
the margins of a market-oriented politics.  "Substantive democracy" is
just not in the cards.  Democracy may be possible, even necessary, but
ecological realism demands that the old dream of liberation yield to
the "socialization of the market."   

     Can Third-Wave environmentalism work?  The test must come in the
real social world.  Could a global market in CO2-emissions rights, as
Bush has half-seriously proposed, really help?  The first problem is
determining just how much CO2 each country would have the "right" to
generate in the first place.  If any matter was ever complicated, this
is it, but it's fair to say that, in general, the issue is split
between the North and the South, with the North preferring quotas
based on GNP and the South preferring quotas based on population. 
This is a rather basic disagreement, and it's hard to imagine it being
overcome without social changes that go far beyond those imagined by
Third Wave reformers.

     In fact, it's difficult to be optimistic about the prospects for
any kind of regulation, direct or market-mediated, as long as the core
institutions of society -- the market, militarism, property and wage
relations, the fossil-fuel economy -- are taken as surface phenomena
amenable to easy manipulation by bureaucratic agencies.  Consider Los
Angeles again, or any traffic-clotted U.S. city.  What institutions
were central to its construction?  Well, there's the auto-industrial
complex, for starters, but also the real-estate market.  How shall
they be regulated?  Fossil Fuels Policy Action, a small and not
particularly Third Wave organization, proposes a "paving moratorium."
[26]  It's a simple, lovely idea, and we may perhaps measure our
condition by checking to see if we can take it seriously. 

THE THIRD WORLD
     The greenhouse debate has split the planet between the
industrialized nations and countries like China and India that claim
that, since they currently generate only a fraction of the greenhouse
gases, they should be substantially aided for cooperating in ways that
will impede their development.  As things stand, their claim is more
than reasonable.  The habits of the average North American release
five tons of CO2 into the atmosphere each year, while the global
average, an average that includes North Americans, is only half a ton.
  
     From an ecological perspective, everything depends on the Third
World following a post-greenhouse path.  If it doesn't, conservation
gains in the industrialized countries will be swamped by deforestation
and increased greenhouse gas production in the Third World -- where
the rate of growth of energy production, much of it based on burning
dirty coal, is twice the global average.  Unfortunately, helping the
Third World carve out a radical new development path is no more than a
rhetorical priority in the North, where all the real effort is going
into the post-Cold War scramble for position.

     At least environmentalists now understand this situation,
something that was not true as recently as five years ago.  In fact,
both the left and the liberal wings of the environmental movement now
see Third World debt as an ecological issue -- along with pollution,
population, energy production, agriculture, and the rest of it. 
Today, all serious reviews of the greenhouse crisis agree there's no
real solution that doesn't define a new kind of development, one
attractive enough to derail the considerable momentum of heavy-metal
industrialism.  All of which serves to complicate life for liberal
politicians like Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, who recently
became the first U.S. Senator to write (with coauthor Jack Waugh) a
greenhouse book, World on Fire: Saving an Endangered Earth. [27]  Its
most interesting moment comes when Mitchell tries to wedge
"sustainable development" into the political agenda.  He makes the
main point, that "even dramatic improvements in energy efficiency will
not be sufficient to protect the environment -- if they are confined
to the industrialized world," then goes on to call for "retiring the
debt of developing countries" and for "technology-transfer, subsidies
and loans" designed to "take developing counties beyond the levels of
efficiency justified on the basis of free market prices."  Brave
words, these, from a Senator who toured the Persian Gulf before the
war, posing with Bush and adding a much-needed bipartisan gloss to his
threats of war.

     Public relations, as always, is part of the problem.  The
"development community" -- the World Bank and its kin -- is abuzz with
talk of "sustainable development," but thus far the reality has been
considerably less inspiring than the rhetoric.  It's the same story
with the debt crisis.  Certainly the Brady Plan for "debt relief" aims
not to lift the debt now crushing the Third World, but only to reduce
it enough to avoid open revolt, and thus to continue the agonizing
process by which the debt crisis is indefinitely, and profitably,
protracted.  The workings of the debt-management machinery are
familiar enough -- new loans and a new market, this time a market in
discounted debt.  The discounts reflect domestic austerity and
international "confidence," and the debt market that sets them seems
natural enough in a market-fixated society.  Will it, however, ease
the burden enough to allow humane development paths?  This is an
altogether different matter.  Much of the Third World is sinking into
ecological and social chaos, yet the international response is
constrained by the prerogatives of the banks.  The banks!  This will
change only when, in the words of one New York Times commentary, a
Washington "consensus" develops that "the problems afflicting [the]
debtors pose a threat to regional political and economic stability."
[28]  How, under such conditions, can the Third World be asked to
sacrifice for the common good? 

     The bottom line is that the Third World is profoundly constrained
by economic and political dependency on the cores of international
power.  The industrial nations, with their control of capital and
technology, hold the keys to a global post-greenhouse economy.  If
ecological disaster is to be avoided, they must act soon, decisively
and in a way that doesn't simply seek to modernize the terms of Third
World dependency.  It's difficult to see this happening without a
successful and radical campaign for ecological conversion here at
home.

     And where is that campaign?  Stalled as usual, though conversion
activists remain optimistic about "the long run."  There are, to be
sure, grounds for optimism -- if the US economy continues its decline,
as is likely, pressure for a green "New Deal" of some sort will build. 
But will it be green enough to stop the warming?  Think concretely. 
What authority would enforce the depreciation of oil company stocks? 
If this is politically impossible, then what politics and what market
structure could motivate the redeployment of the capital now tied up
in fossil fuels?  Over what time period?  What about the overall
infrastructure, so much of which wouldn't fit into a post-greenhouse
world?  Who would take the loss?  The government?  Is the financing of
a solar transition in the Third World to be left to the World Bank? 
What, finally, will it take to get something more than fatal half-
measures? 

ECOLOGY AFTER THE COLD WAR
     Earth Day 1990 brought a spasm of liberal self-congratulation, a
"Good Earthkeeping Seal of Approval," and a victory in the dolphin
battle -- but little by way of structural reform.  Still, 1990 will
remain as a milestone, marking the passing of the Cold War as clearly
as it marks a watershed in environmental history.  The next decade may
not be a happy one, but it will see the emergence of a new kind of
ecological politics.

     Not that there isn't already a radical green politics, or that it
hasn't already marked the political landscape.  But, far too often,
the radicals place their faith in abstract ideals like "nature" and
"personal responsibility," and are innocent of any coherent, sensible 
explanation for ecological crisis.  Fortunately, a mature red/green
politics is also, finally, emerging -- "fortunately" because the need
for it is acute.  Why do we go to war for oil?  Why is economic growth
so chaotic and compulsive?  Why does technology always seem to betray
its promise?  These questions simply find no good answers in the moral
and biocentric catagories of traditional environmentalism.

     The ecology movement has been deeply marked by the silences and
fears of Cold War culture, and it will take time for it to learn the
significance (and limits) of the socialist tradition.  Many if not
most ecological radicals still see "politics" as synonymous with self-
serving compromise, and "capitalism" as merely an ideological category
of a justly moribund left.  Their view -- that communism and
capitalism are only variations on a system of exterminist
industrialism -- is not without merit, but it's hard to see it as the
basis of an adequate politics, if only because its name for the beast,
"industrialism," suggests inadequate correctives.

     It is a measure of the times that, in the last few years, an 
essay called The End of History [29] and a book called The End of
Nature both took proud places in the march of literary events.  In the
first, a State Department functionary named Francis Fukuyama invoked
Hegel's philosophy of history to claim the "triumph of liberal
democracy" as an event of such significance that now "there will be
neither art nor philosophy, just the perpetual caretaking of the
museum of human history."  In the second, a young man described the
likely outcomes of greenhouse warming, then went on to dismiss all
politics as insignificant, and to compose an ode to despair.     

     McKibben tells the tale of environmental radicals throughout the
developed world, who can squeeze neither their fears nor their hopes
into the old moulds.  That they reject "socialism" along with official
environmentalism is not altogether bad news, for the "real" socialism
we have known has no just claim to our loyalty.  But neither is it
good news, for environmentalism, radical or otherwise, has a distance
to go before it can take up the challenges of the ecological crisis.  

     The distinctive culture and ideas of the greens -- deep ecology,
romantic naturalism, the claim to be "neither right nor left, but out
front," animal rights, direct action, the too-simple Luddism that sees
only evil in advanced technology -- are easy to ridicule.  But recall
that the ecology movement evolved in a world where socialism, and left
radicalism in general, were lost in the shadows of the Eastern Bloc,
and that by virtue of its independence it has been able to claim key
cultural and technological problems as its own, and to develop its own
increasingly radical language.  Left greens should remember this, even
as they call upon their traditions to study the economic and political
aspects of the crisis, deepen the notion of radical democracy, and
mark the currents in these all pervasive and almost invisible
capitalist waters.

     The coming devastation will breed a vast hatred.  It may even be
that the ideas of the green hard core -- ecological misanthropy most
notable among them -- are poised for a breakout into larger domains. 
Fortunately, this is not the only possibility, and radical outrage is
not likely to remain eternally constrained within the anti-communist
frameworks of Cold War analysis.  The ecology movement is full of
those just now discovering the pleasures of romanticism, and believing
it the essence of true revolution.  Far more important than their
illusions, though, is the probability that capitalism -- like the
atmosphere -- may soon cease to seem a part of a natural, eternal
world.  

     It's hard to be realistic about the ecological crisis without
yielding to the formidable logic of a very grim situation.  Still, it
is wrong to follow McKibben in attributing the tragedy of the times to
some inescapable trajectory towards an ecological holocaust.  It is,
rather, because our trajectory is not inescapable, because there is so
much that could be done, and because so little of it is being done
that this is such a dark time.  This paralysis is the real tragedy.
I'd like to thank Bill McKibben, who's book pissed me off so much I
had to write this, and the San Francisco Socialist Review Collective,
which really bent over backwards to help me get it right.


NOTES

1) Susan Sontag, "AIDS and Its Metaphors," New York Review of Books,
October 27, 1988.

2) Lester Brown, et. al., State of the World, 1990: A Worldwatch
Institute Report on Progress Toward a Sustainable Society.  (New York:
W.W. Norton, 1990.  Page 174.)

3) Francesca Lyman, et al., The Greenhouse Trap: What We're Doing to
the Atmosphere and How We can Slow Global Warming.  (Boston: Beacon
Press, World Resources Institute, 1990.  Page 159-162).

4) "Team of Scientists Sees Substantial Warming of Earth," New York
Times, April 16, 1990.

5) Stephen H. Schneider, Global Warming: Are We Entering the Green-
house Century? (San Francisco: Sierra Club, 1989).  Michael
Oppenheimer and Robert Boyle, Dead Heat: The Race Against the
Greenhouse Effect (New York: Basic Books, 1990).  Bill McKibben, The
End of Nature. 

6) Stephen H. Schneider, "The Changing Climate," Scientific American
September 1989.  Page 79.

7) "Bush Asks Cautious Response To Threat of Global Warming," New York
Times, Feb 6, 1990.  Page 1.

8) "Skeptics are Challenging Dire 'Greenhouse' Views," New York Times,
December 13, 1989.  Page 1. 

9) "Greenhouse Skeptic Out in the Cold," Science, December 1, 1989. 
Page 1118.

10) "Vapor Trail: Observations Support a Key Aspect of Warming
Forecasts, Scientific American, March 1990.  Page 24.

11) Warren T. Brookes, "The Global Warming Panic," Forbes, December
25, 1989. 

12) "Bush Denies Delaying Action On Averting Shift in Climate,"  New
York Times, April 19, 1990. 

13) See 50% More Production: The Failure of the 1990 Montreal
Protocol, a report of the Greenpeace Atmosphere and Energy campaign.

14) Dennis Hayes, "Highest Disregard," Mother Jones, December 1989. 

15) See, "The Clean Air Act Won't Clean the Air," Greenpeace, November
12, 1989, "The True Cost of Oil," Earth Island Journal, Summer 1988,
page 22., and "Stagnant Politics, Dirty Air: Autos and the
Environment," In These Times, December 12, 1989.

16) "Controlling Oil's Two Great Threats," New York Times, December
14, 1990.

17) "LA Fights for Breath," New York Times Magazine, July 30, 1989. 

18) "Cure for Greenhouse Effect: The Costs Will Be Staggering," New
York Times, November 19, 1989. 

19) "Global Warming: Look or Leap?," New York Times, February 14,
1990. 

20) Amory B. Lovins, Soft Energy Paths: Toward a Durable Peace,
(Cambridge: Ballinger, Friends of the Earth, 1977). 

21) Amory Lovins, et al., Least-Cost Energy.  Reprinted by the Rocky
Mountain Institute, 1739 Snowmass Creek Road, Snowmass CO) 81654-9199.

22) Fighting the Greenhouse Effect," New York Times, August 28, 1988. 
For a more recent, and very unabashed version of the same tale, see
"Nuclear Power: Do We Have a Choice?," the cover story of the April
29, 1991 issue of Time.

23) Reilly's support of nukes is a matter of public record, but see
for example "U.S. Reported Speeding Talks For Global Warming Accord,"
in the November 21, 1989 issue of the New York Times.  For Schneider's
position, see Global Warming, page 245.

24) See Least Cost Energy; in fact, see the Rocky Mountain Institute's
catalog.

25) See Amory Lovins, "Making Markets in Resource Efficiency," Rocky
Mountain Institute, 1989.  For an entry into the left discussion, see
Diane Elton's "The Socialization of Markets," in issue 172 of New Left
Review (Nov/Dec 88, pages 3-44), or look up "environmental protection"
in the index of Alec Nove's The Economics of Feasible Socialism,
(Boston: George Allen & Unwin, 1983)

26) Alliance for a Paving Moratorium, Federal Square-E. PO Box 8558
Fredericksburg VA 22404.

27) George Mitchell with Jack Waugh, World on Fire: Saving an
Endangered Earth (New York: Scribner's Sons, 1991).

28) "U.S. Efforts to Aid Debtor Nations Bring 'Profound
Disappointment'", New York Times, July 24, 1989.  Page 1. 

29) "The End of History" was first printed in the Summer 1989 issue of
The National Interest.




BIO BLURB

Tom Athanasiou runs an online publishing group at Sun Microsystems. 
He is currently developing a book on ecological politics after the
Cold War.


</PRE>

</BODY>

</html>


</DOC>