
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT03-B20-51</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA005-000051-B017-426</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://lacebark.ntu.edu.au:80/j_mitroy/sid101/ipcc/ipcc92.html 138.80.61.12 19970221151808 text/html 17583
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Fri, 21 Feb 1997 14:48:14 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.3
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 17411
Last-modified: Tue, 09 Jul 1996 02:25:59 GMT
</DOCHDR>





<html>

<TITLE>IPCC92 Supplement</TITLE>

<BODY BGCOLOR="#ffffff">

<PRE>



     1992 IPCC Supplement  -  Scientific Assessment, Summary


The 1992 Supplement is an interim report, it is not as
well-structured as the 1990 Assessment, and there are almost
no references.  I tried to select what I presumed to be generally
interesting points, this is a personal judgment.  Information
pertaining to the same topic often appears at two or three places
in the Supplement, I tried to collect it.  I tried to retain the
meaning and often the wording of the original but, alas, English
is not my first language. Any errors or misconceptions are mine.

Jan Schloerer             May 29, 1992

------------------------------------------------------------------


   IPCC 1992 SUPPLEMENT  -  SUMMARY OF THE SCIENTIFIC ASSESSMENT

        [1]  Major Conclusions
        [2]  Gases and Aerosols   (includes radiative forcing)
        [3]  Climate Observations
        [4]  Modelling and Scenarios
        [5]  Key Uncertainties and Further Work Required
        [6]  References


[1]  Major Conclusions

Findings of scientific research since 1990 either confirm or do
not justify alteration of the major conclusions of the 1990 IPCC
Scientific Assessment, in particular the following :

o  Emissions resulting from human activities are substantially
increasing the atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane (CH4), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and nitrous oxide
(N2O).
o  The sensitivity of global mean surface temperature to doubling
CO2 is unlikely to lie outside the range 1.5 to 4.5 oC,  with a
best estimate, based on model results and taking into account the
observed climate record, of 2.5 oC.
o  Due to our incomplete understanding, there are many
uncertainties in the predictions, particularly with regard to the
timing, magnitude and regional patterns of climate change.
o  Global mean surface air temperature has increased by 0.3 to 0.6
oC over the last 100 years.
o  The size of this warming is broadly consistent with predictions
of climate models, but it is also of the same magnitude as natural
climate variability. Thus the observed increase could be largely
due to this natural variability; alternatively this variability
and other human factors could have offset a still larger
human-induced greenhouse warming.
o  The unequivocal detection of the enhanced greenhouse effect
from observations is not likely for a decade or more.


[2]  Gases and Aerosols   (includes radiative forcing)

o  CO2:  The best estimate for global fossil fuel emissions in
1989 and 1990 is 6.0 (5.5-6.5) GtC  (gigatonnes of carbon = 10^9
tonnes of C), compared to 5.7 (5.2-6.2) GtC in 1987.  Despite new
informationregarding rates of deforestation, there is no strong
reason to revise the IPCC 1990 estimate of annual average net flux
to the atmosphere of 1.6 (0.6-2.6) GtC from land-use change during
the decade of the 1980s.  The estimated total release of carbon in
the form of CO2 from oil well fires in Kuwait during 1991 was
0.065 GtC, about one percent of total annual anthropogenic
emissions.  Over the last decade, the fraction of CO2 emissions
which remains in the atmosphere is estimated to have been  46 %
(39-53 %).  The imbalance (of order 1-2 GtC/year) between sources
and sinks, that is, the "missing CO2 sink", has not yet been
resolved.

o  Sulphur:  The cooling effect of sulphate aerosols (particles,
not to be confused with propellants used in 'aerosol sprays')
resulting from sulphur emissions may have offset a significant
part of the greenhouse warming in the Northern Hemisphere during
the past several decades.  For clear-sky conditions alone, the
cooling caused by current rates of emissions has been estimated to
be about 1 W/m^2  (averaged over the Northern Hemisphere), which
should be compared with the estimate of 2.5 W/m^2 for the heating
due to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions up to the present. 
In addition, sulphate aerosols may affect the radiation budget
through changes in cloud optical properties.

There are large regional variations in the effects of the
aerosols.  The effect is negligible in the Southern Hemisphere. 
The globally averaged magnitude of the effect of sulphate aerosols
has not yet been calculated accurately and further work is needed. 
The aerosols are very short-lived in the atmosphere, their effect
on global warming rapidly adjusts to increases or decreases in
emissions.  While partially offsetting the greenhouse warming, the
sulphur emissions are also responsible for acid rain and other
environmental effects.

o  Stratospheric ozone and CFCs:  Depletion of O3 in the lower
strato-sphere during the 1980s has caused a reduction in radiative
forcing which is believed to be comparable in magnitude  to the
increase in radiative forcing due to CFCs (globally-averaged) over
the last decade or so.  The effect at high latitudes is
particularly pronounced.  The worldwide consumption of CFCs 11,
12, and 113 is now 40 % below 1986 levels.  Further reductions are
mandated by the 1990 London Amendments to the Montreal Protocol. 
Even if the 1990 London Amendments were to be implemented by all
nations, the abundance of stratospheric chlorine and bromine will
increase over the next several years.

o  Tropospheric ozone:  There is evidence to indicate that O3
levels in the troposphere up to 10km altitude above the few
existing ozonesonde stations in Europe have increased by up to 10
% per decade over the past decades.  There is not an adequate
global set of observations to quantify the magnitude of the
increase in radiative forcing.  However, it has been calculated
that a 10 % uniform global increase in tropospheric O3 would
increase radiative forcing by about 0.1 W/m^2. Little new
information is available regarding the tropospheric O3 precursors  
(CO, non-methane hydrocarbons, NOx), their budgets remain
uncertain.

o  Methane:  Whilst the rates of increase in the atmospheric
concentrations of many greenhouse gases have continued to grow or
remain steady, those of methane and some halogen compounds have
slowed. The rate for methane has declined from about 20 ppbv/year
in the late 1970s to possibly as low as 10 ppbv/year in 1989.  No
completely satisfactory hypothesis has yet been forwarded to
explain these observations.  There has been some progress
regarding the sources of the methane emissions, e.g., some data
indicate that global emissions from rice paddies may amount to
less than previously estimated.  But there are still many
uncertainties in accurately quantifying the magnitude of emissions
from individual sources.  The latest estimate of the atmospheric
lifetime of methane is about 11 years.

o  Nitrous oxide (N2O):  Nylon production, nitric acid production
and automobiles with three-way catalysts have been identified as
possibly significant anthropogenic global sources of N2O. 
However, the sum of all known anthropogenic and natural sources is
still barely sufficient to balance the calculated atmospheric sink
or to explain the observed increase in the atmospheric abundance
of N2O.

o  Global Warming Potentials:  Gases can exert a radiative forcing
both  directly and indirectly.  Direct forcing occurs when the gas
itself is a greenhouse gas; indirect forcing occurs when chemical
transformation of the original gas produces or destroys a gas or
gases which themselves are greenhouse gases.  The concept of the
Global Warming Potential (GWP) has been developed as a measure of
the possible warming effect of each gas relative to CO2.  For many
gases, the practical utility of the GWP depends on adequate
quantification of the indirect effects as well as the direct. The
direct components of the GWPs have been recalculated, taking into
account revised estimated lifetimes, for a set of time horizons
ranging from 20 to 500 years, with CO2 as a reference gas. 
Because of incomplete understanding of chemical processes, most of
the indirect GWPs reported in IPCC (1990) are likely to be in
substantial error.  Working Group I is not yet in a position to
recommend revised numerical values.  For methane, it is known that
the indirect GWP is positive and could be comparable in magnitude
to its direct value.  Recalculated GWP values for selected key
gases for the 100 year time horizon  (note that GWPs depend on the
time horizon) :

                            Direct GWP   Sign of the indirect GWP
      Carbon dioxide              1          none
      Methane (CH4)              11          positive
      Nitrous oxide (N2O)       270          uncertain
      CFC-11                   3400          negative
      CFC-12                   7100          negative
      HCFC-22                  1600          negative
      HFC-134a                 1200          none


[3]  Climate Observations

o  The anomalously high global mean surface temperatures of the
late 1980s have continued into 1990 and 1991 which are the warmest
years in the record.   

o  Average warming over parts of the Northern Hemisphere
mid-latitude continents has been found to be largely characterized
by increases in minimum (night-time) rather than maximum (daytime)
temperatures.  These changes appear to be partly related to
increases in cloudiness but other factors cannot be excluded such
as a direct cooling effect of aerosols on maximum temperatures in
sunny weather, an influence of increasing concentrations of
greenhouse gases and some residual influence of urbanisation on
minimum temperatures.  Only 25 % of the gobal land area has been
analysed, a more complete study is needed.

o  There has been considerable interest in mid-tropospheric
temperature observations made since 1979 from the Microwave
Sounding Unit (MSU) aboard the TIROS-N satellites.  The MSU data
have a truly global coverage but there is only a short record (13
years) of measurements; the surface and the radiosonde data are
less spatially complete but have much longer records (over 130 and
near 30 years respectively).  Globally-averaged trends in MSU,
radiosonde and surface data sets between 1979 and 1991 differ
somewhat (0.06, 0.17, and 0.18 oC per decade, respectively),
although the differences are not statistically significant. 
Satellite sounders, radiosonde and surface instruments all have
different measurement characteristics; in addition, geographical
and temporal variations in mid-tropospheric and surface
temperatures are not expected to be identical.  Despite this,
correlations between global annual values of the three data sets
are quite high.

o  The volcanic eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991 is expected to
lead to transitory stratospheric warming.  With less certainty,
because of other natural influences, surface and troposheric
cooling may occur during the next few years.  Individual volcanic
eruptions, such as that of El Chichon (1982) or Mount Pinatubo,
should have negligible effect on the long-term trend.

o  Some influence of solar variations on time-scales associated
with several sunspot cycles remains unproven but is a possibility. 
The existence of strong correlations between characteristics of
the solar activity cycle and global mean temperatures has been
reported.  The only immediately plausible physical explanation of
these correlations involves variability of the sun's total
irradiance on time-scales longer than that of the 11-year activity
cycle.  Since precise measurements of the irradiance are only
available for the last decade, no firm conclusions regarding the
influence of solar variability on climate change can be drawn.
   

[4]  Modelling and Scenarios
o  The consistency between observations of global temperature
changes over the past century  and model simulations of the
warming due to greenhouse gases over the same period  is expected
to improve  if allowance is made for the increasing evidence of a
cooling effect due to sulphate aerosols and stratospheric ozone
depletion.  This has not yet been done.

o  There continues to be slow improvement in the ability of models
to simulate present climate, although further improvement in the
model resolution and the parametrization of physical processes are
needed.  Since the last report, further evidence has accumulated
that atmospheric models are capable of reproducing a range of
aspects of atmospheric variability.  Confidence in regional
climate patterns based directly on GCM (general circulation
models) output remains low and there is no consistent evidence
regarding changes in variability or storminess.  Given the present
incomplete knowledge of climate, the possibility of surprises
cannot be ruled out.

o  Transient (time-dependent) simulations with coupled ocean-
atmosphere models (CGCMs), in which neither aerosols nor ozone
changes have been included, suggest a rate of global warming that
is consistent, within the range of uncertainties, with the 0.3 oC
per decade warming rate quoted by IPCC (1990) for Scenario A
(Business-as-Usual) of greenhouse gas emissions.  The simulated
rate of change of sea level  _due to oceanic thermal expansion
only_ ranges from 2 to 4 cm per decade, again consistent to the
previous report.  CGCMs produce variability on decadal time-scales
similar in some respects to that observed.  Much further
development and validation of coupled models is required.

o  A set of updated scenarios have been developed for use in
modelling studies which describe a wide range of possible future
emissions in the absence of coordinated policy change to climate
change.

Some of their assumptions are :

      Scenario   Population   Economic Growth   Economic Growth
                  by 2100       1990-2025         1990-2100

      IS92a         11.3          2.9 %             2.3 %
      IS92b         11.3          2.9 %             2.3 %
      IS92c          6.4          2.0 %             1.2 %
      IS92d          6.4          2.7 %             2.0 %
      IS92e         11.3          3.5 %             3.0 %
      IS92f         17.6          2.9 %             2.3 %

In addition, each scenario includes assumptions on energy
supplies, emission controls, sources and sinks of greenhouse
gases, forest biomass and deforestation.  IS92e and IS92f result
in higher CO2 emissions than SA90  (Scenario A, Business as Usual,
from IPCC 1990). IS92a and IS92b result in slightly lower,  IS92d
and IS92c in much lower CO2 emissions than SA90.  The revised
scenarios for CFCs are much lower than in SA90.  Scenarios must be
used with great caution, scenario outputs are not predictions of
the future.  Population and economic growth, structural changes in
economies, technological advance, or developments such as those in
the republics of the former  Soviet Union are among the factors
which could exert major influence on future levels of CO2
emisssions.


[5]  Key Uncertainties and Further Work Required

Prediction of the timing, magnitude and regional patterns of
climate change is affected by uncertainties which continue to be
rooted in the inadequate understanding of :

o  Sources and sinks of greenhouse gases and aerosols (resulting
from sulphur emissions), including their indirect effects on
global warming.
o  Clouds  (their feedback effect on greenhouse gas-induced global
warming, also the effect of aerosols on clouds and their radiative
properties)  and other elements of the atmospheric water budget. 
o  Oceans, which through their thermal inertia and possible
changes in circulation, influence the timing and pattern of
climate change.
o  Polar ice sheets, whose response to climate change also affects
predictions of sea level rise.
o  Land surface processes and feedbacks, including hydrological
and ecological processes which couple regional and global
climates.

Reduction of these uncertainties requires, among others, improved
observations of climate-forcing variables and of the relevant
variables of the climate system, better understanding of
climate-related processes, more detailed knowledge of past climate
changes, and improved international exchange of climate data. 
Scenarios depend not only on factors which can be addressed by the
natural sciences but also on factors such as population and
economic growth and energy policy where there is much uncertainty
and which are the concern of the social sciences.  Natural and
social scientists need to cooperate closely in the development of
scenarios of future emissions.

[6]  References

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (WMO, UNEP)
   1992 IPCC Supplement.   February, 1992.
   IPCC Secretariat, World Meteorological Organization
   Case Postale 2300,  CH-1211  Geneve  2,  Switzerland
Climate Change  -  The IPCC Scientific Assessment
   Report Prepared for IPCC by Working Group I
   Houghton, J.T.,  G.J. Jenkins,  J.J. Ephraums  (eds.)
   Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK 1990
   ISBN 0-521-40720-6  paperback  (approx.  US:$35, D:DM60)
Climate Change  -  The IPCC Impacts Assessment
   Report prepared for IPCC by Working Group II
   Tegart, W.J.McG.,  G.W.Sheldon,  D.C.Griffiths  (eds.)
   Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra/New York(?)
1990
   ISBN 0-644-13497-6  paperback  (approx.  US:$25, D:DM55 by
surface)
Climate Change  -  The IPCC Response Strategies
   [ anonymous, prepared by Working Group III ]
   Island Press, Washington, D.C. 1991
   ISBN 0-55963-102-3  paperback  (approx.  US: ? , D:DM70 by air)

</PRE>

</BODY>

</html>

</DOC>